Introduction
Extracellular and membrane-associated
proteins represent approximately
one-third of all protein-coding genes and are key targets for antibody-based
therapeutics.
Antibodies provide diverse
mechanisms of action in cancer therapy, including receptor inhibition
or activation,
immune cell recruitment,
antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs) for targeted
toxin delivery,
and extracellular targeted
protein degradation (eTPD) for proteolytic degradation.
Among these, ADCs combine tumor-targeting antibodies
with cytotoxic drugs to achieve selective tumor cell killing.
However, the efficacy of ADCs hinges on the efficient
internalization of the antibody–antigen complex to facilitate
intracellular drug release in the lysosome. Not all surface antigens
undergo productive internalization upon antibody binding, posing a
significant limitation to ADC effectiveness.
Recent innovations in bispecific antibodies have sought to overcome
this hurdle by enhancing receptor internalization through receptor
clustering, such as biparatopic ADCs,
,
or by targeting
fast-internalizing receptors in dual-antigen strategies for more efficient
lysosomal trafficking.
,
In parallel, eTPD has emerged
as a promising therapeutic approach
that co-opts natural endolysosomal pathways to selectively degrade
membrane-bound and soluble extracellular proteins. eTPD utilizes a
wide array of cell surface degrader systems including: neonatal Fc
receptor (FcRn),
glycan binding receptors,
−
transmembrane E3 ligases,
,
cytokine receptors,
integrins,
and
transferrin receptors.
Increasing the
optionality of cell surface degraders offers a greater opportunity
for cell-specific targeting. However, unlike ADCs or bispecific T
cell engagers that deliver cytotoxic payloads or recruit immune effectors,
eTPD efficacy depends on the biological importance of the target itself.
Effective targets are typically those essential for tumor growth or
survival, such as mutant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) with
constitutive autophosphorylation
or human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
amplification. This requirement substantially narrows the pool of
viable targets for therapeutic eTPD, which also exhibits markedly
weaker potency compared to that of ADCs.
Given that ADCs with
cleavable linkers rely on efficient lysosomal
trafficking and that eTPD excels at directing targets into this pathway,
we sought to harness the efficient lysosomal delivery capacity of
eTPD to improve ADC payload delivery. To this end, we developed degrader–drug
conjugates (DDCs), a new class of bifunctional therapeutics that intentionally
hybridize eTPD with ADC for greater efficiency of drug payload delivery.
As a proof-of-concept, we exploited the robust recycling low-density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) as a lysosomal trafficking effector. LDLR
naturally internalizes LDL via clathrin-mediated endocytosis
,
and facilitates its delivery to the lysosome at low pH.
LDLR is upregulated in proliferating cancer
cells
,
and activated T cells.
It is one of the fastest and most efficient internalizers
that recycles through the lysosome every 12 min.
These features make the LDLR an attractive candidate for
DDCs, which we refer to as LDLR-targeting chimeras (LIPTACs). We show
that LIPTACs mediate selective and efficient lysosomal degradation
for multiple membrane proteins. Moreover, by conjugating cytotoxic
payloads to either LIPTACs or cytokine receptor-targeting chimeras
(KineTACs),
we show that DDCs can boost
the potencies of conventional ADCs by up to 20-fold
in vitro
. Together, our findings highlight DDCs as a hybrid modality that
may represent a new path forward to both enhance payload delivery
and broaden the therapeutic utility of antibody-based modalities.
Results
Selection and Characterization of LDLR Antibodies
The
extracellular portion of the LDLR contains the ligand binding domain,
the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain, and the O-linked sugar
domain.
We and others have observed that
the ligand-binding domain of the LDLR can be shed to varying degrees
,
in cells transformed with
KRAS­(G12V)
or
HER2
. This prompted us to select for antibodies against
the membrane proximal EGF-like domain of the LDLR in order to preserve
its ligand ability for LDL uptake and to enable recruitment of both
full-length and cleaved forms (cLDLR) for eTPD. After four rounds
of phage selection, we plated 96 single phage colonies for screening
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (
Figure S1a,b
).
Phage that passed initial screening were
expressed recombinantly as monoclonal fragment antigen-binding (Fab)
antibodies for further characterization (
Table S1
). The ELISA binding assay against the cLDLR or full-length
(flLDLR) identified multiple high-affinity binding-affinity clones
(
Figure
a,
Figure S2a
). Flow cytometry confirmed that all
Fabs bound to the MDA-MB-231 cells (
Figure
b). None of the Fabs exhibited cross-reactivity
with the other members of the LDLR family, including the LDLR-related
protein 2 (LRP2), LRP8, and VLDLR (
Figure S2a
). All the Fabs displayed minimal polyreactive binding across the
nonspecific antigen panels
(
Figure S2b
). Epitope binning revealed that 142F6
recognized a distinct epitope, whereas all other clones bound the
same LDLR epitope (
Figure S3
). Among them,
142F1 showed the highest affinity by ELISA, and together with 142F6
was prioritized for further characterization. Notably, 142F1 and 142F6
bound simultaneously, consistent with recognition of two distinct,
noncompeting epitopes (
Figure
c). Bio-layer interferometry (BLI) experiments showed that
142F1 and 142F6 bound to cLDLR with dissociation constants of 5.8
and 16 nM, respectively (
Figure
d).
1
Characterization of LDLR-specific antibodies. (a) ELISA
binding
of recombinant Fabs against the cLDLR antigen. Absorbance was read
at 450 nm. An anti-CDCP1 Fab 4A06
was
used as a negative isotype control. Each sample was tested in biological
duplicate and error bars represented standard deviations. (b) Flow
cytometry of different Fabs binding to LDLR
+
MDA-MB-231
cells. Then 50 nM of each Fab was incubated with cells for 30 min
and washed twice, followed by AF647 conjugated goat antihuman IgG
(H+L) antibody staining for 15 min. (c) Epitope binning of two anti-LDLR
Fabs, 142F1 and 142F6, revealed two different epitopes on cLDLR. Biotinylated
cLDLR was captured using a streptavidin biosensor and indicated antibodies
at a concentration of 200 nM were incubated for 10 min followed by
incubation with 50 nM of the second competing antibodies for 5 min.
(d) BLI analysis of 142F1 and 142F6 Fabs to estimate their affinities
to cLDLR. Biontinylated cLDLR was immobilized via the streptavidin
biosensor and varying concentrations of each Fab was injected. Black
lines were the experimental trace obtained from the BLI experiments
and colored lines were the global fits. (e) Internalization of pH-sensitive
Phrodo red-labeled LDL on HeLa cells after 30 min pretreatment with
LDL, heparin, or each Fab, respectively. Total integrated intensity
is calculated by ROCU × μm
2
/image on the Incucyte
software. Each sample was tested in biological triplicate and error
bars represent standard deviations. Statistics were calculated by
one-way ANOVA and Holm–Sidak multiple comparisons test.
Given that LDLR is essential for regulating plasma
cholesterol
levels, we then investigated whether our LDLR Fabs affected LDL uptake.
We used an Incuyte-based uptake assay with fluorescently labeled (pHrodo)
LDL to monitor trafficking to low pH vesicles. We serum starved Hela
cells, treated them with LDLR Fabs, heparin that binds LDL and blocks
LDLR binding,
,
or unlabeled competitor LDL respectively,
and then added pHrodo red dye-labeled LDL. As expected, pHrodo red
dye-labeled LDL trafficked robustly in both the presence and absence
of LDLR Fabs, but was inhibited upon addition of unlabeled LDL and
heparin (
Figure
e).
These data suggest that the LDLR-mediated LDL trafficking remains
intact upon Fab binding.
Design of LIPTAC Degraders for EGFR Degradation
The
design of LIPTACs involved a bispecific antibody, with one arm targeting
a protein of interest (POI) and the other arm recruiting LDLR to bring
the POI and LDLR in close proximity for lysosomal trafficking and
eTPD. As a proof-of-concept, we generated LIPTACs to degrade EGFR,
a receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a critical role in the development
and progression of various types of cancers.
,
The therapeutic anti-EGFR Cetuximab (Ctx) and anti-LDLR antibody
(142F1 or 142F6) were fused to heterodimeric Fc domains respectively,
with T350V/L351Y/F405A/Y407V mutations in chain
A and T350V/T366L/K392L/T394W mutations in chain B. To eliminate Fc-effector
function for macrophage and NK cell recruitment, we introduced the
L234A/L235A/P329G mutations (LALAPG)
in
both Fc chains. To avoid heavy and light chain mispairing, one arm
was designed as a single chain variable fragment (scFv) and the other
in Fab format (
Figure
a). We produced four Ctx-LIPTAC formats, as shown in
Figure S4a
and evaluated their degradation efficiency
in HeLa cells. After 24 h treatment with 50 nM of each LIPTAC, levels
of EGFR were quantified by Western blotting. We found that LIPTAC1
with anti-LDLR 142F1 as Fab and anti-EGFR Ctx in scFv exhibited the
greatest EGFR degradation (
Figure S4b
).
This improvement may result from both the higher binding affinity
and distinct epitope specificity
,
of the LDLR antibody.
A dose–response curve for LIPTAC1 at 24h revealed that LIPTAC1
retained potent EGFR degradation activity at concentrations as low
as 5 nM (
Figure
b).
2
Generation
of LIPTACs for degradation of EGFR. (a) Schematic illustration
of LDLR-Ctx LIPTAC bispecific constructs. (b) Western blot showing
degradation of total EGFR on HeLa cells following 24 h of treatment
with Ctx-LIPTAC or 50 nM control antibodies. Data represents three
biological replicates. Percent EGFR levels were quantified by ImageJ
relative to PBS control. (c) Changes in surface EGFR based on flow
cytometry analysis on MDA-MB-231 cells following 24 h of 50 nM 142F1
isotype IgG, Ctx IgG, Ctx-LIPTAC, or Ctx-KineTAC treatment. Percent
EGFR was determined by median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of the
PE fluorescence channel of live cells. Each sample was tested in biological
triplicate and error bars represented standard deviation. Statistics
were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student
t
test.
***
P
< 0.001. ****
P
< 0.0001.
(d) Western blot showing degradation of total EGFR on MDA-MB-231 cells
after 24 h treatment of 50 nM Ctx, KineTAC, monomeric LDLR isotype,
or varying concetrations of LIPTACs. Data represented three biological
replicates. (e) EGFR degradation in A431 cells following 24 h of Ctx-LIPTAC1
treatment. Data represents three biological replicates. (f) Flow cytometry
analysis showing degradation of surface EGFR on A431 cells following
24 h of Ctx-LIPTACs, 50 nM Ctx IgG, and 50 nM Ctx-KineTAC treatment.
Each sample was tested in biological triplicate and error bars represent
standard deviations. Statistics were calculated by unpaired two-tailed
student
t
test. ***
P
< 0.001.
****
P
< 0.0001. (g) Western blot analysis of EGFR
and LDLR in LDLR knockout and control HCC1143 cells after 24 h of
5 nM LIPTAC treatment. Data represent two biological replicates. (h)
Fold-change in surface protein abundance in MDA-MB-231 cells following
48 h of treatment with or without 50 nM Ctx-LIPTAC1, as measured by
quantitative proteomics analysis. N-Linked cell surface glycoproteins
were captured by the cell-surface capture technology
and enriched by biocytin hydrazide. Surface proteins were
annotated using the SURFY database.
(i)
Confocal microscopy images of HeLa cells treated with 50 nM of indicated
bispecific antibodies or isotype controls for 24 h. Scale bar, 10
μm.
Given the tumor-associated nature of LDLR, we further
tested degradation
in multiple cancer cells. LIPTACs exhibited efficient EGFR degradation
on triple-negative breast cancer cell line HCC1143 (
Figure S4c
), the pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 (
Figure S4d
), as well as the nonsmall cell lung
cancer cell line NCI-H1975 (
Figure S4e
).
The Ctx-KineTAC utilizing the CXCL12 cytokine efficiently degrades
EGFR using the CXCR7 recycling receptor.
Thus, we compared KineTAC and LIPTAC1. Flow cytometry demonstrated
that both LIPTAC1 and the KineTAC efficiently degraded surface EGFR
on MDA-MB-231 cells (
Figure
c). LIPTAC1 showed somewhat higher degradation efficiency
than KineTAC (
Figure
c), possibly due to LDLR expression being higher than that of CXCR7
on MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, LDLR levels did not change, indicating
that the LDLR was not consumed in the process (
Figure S4f
). Similar findings were observed by Western blotting
(
Figure S4g
), suggesting that LDLR was
recycled back. Treatment with either arm of the LIPTACs individually
at 50 nM did not affect EGFR levels, indicating that both targets
must be brought together to cause degradation (
Figure
d). Additionally, LIPTAC1 efficiently degraded
EGFR with a maximal percent degradation (
D
max
) of 86%, on the EGFR high expressing epidermoid carcinoma cell line
A431 (
Figure
d,f).
To assess the specificity of LDLR-mediated protein degradation, we
treated LDLR knockout
(KO) and control
HCC1143 cells with LIPTAC1. EGFR degradation was less efficient in
LDLR KO cells compared with control Cas 9 cells (
Figure
g), indicating the requirement
of LDLR for degradation.
To further investigate the impact of
LIPTAC treatment on the proteome,
we conducted quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of surface-enriched
lysates
following LIPTAC1 treatment in
MDA-MB-231 cells. We found that only a few surface proteins showed
changes in abundance (
Figure S5
), with
EGFR exhibiting the most significant reduction, supporting the high
selectivity of LIPTAC1 (
Figure
h). Interestingly, LDLR levels increased approximately 2-fold
(
Figure
h), potentially
due to partial competition between the 142F1 antibody and the proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) binding (
Figure S6
), which may inhibit PCSK9-mediated LDLR degradation.
,
The abundances of other LDLR family members observed in our data
set, including LRP1, LRP6, and LRP8, remained unchanged. This data
further support the selectivity of the LDLR antibodies.
Immunofluorescence
microscopy revealed virtually complete removal
of EGFR from the cell surface following 24 h of LIPTAC treatment compared
to treatment with PBS, Ctx, or the 142F1 clone, further highlighting
that LIPTACs induce robust internalization of target proteins (
Figure
i). The colocalization
of lysosomal LAMP1 with intracellular EGFR further supported lysosomal
shuttling by LIPTACs. Together, our findings demonstrate that LIPTAC-mediated
targeted protein degradation is efficient, selective, and dependent
on the LDLR.
LIPTAC-Mediated Degradation of Multiple Membrane Proteins
We sought to determine whether LIPTAC could degrade other therapeutically
relevant cell surface proteins. First, we targeted PD-L1, an immune
checkpoint expressed in tumor microenvironment that suppresses cytotoxic
T cell function.
We generated a PD-L1-targeting
LIPTAC by incorporating anti-PD-L1 Atezolizumab
(Atz) Fab with 142F1 scFv. Atz-LIPTAC efficiently degraded
PD-L1 in MDA-MB-231 cells after 24 h of treatment (
Figure
a,b). Additionally, to determine
degradation mechanisms, cells were pretreated with Bafilomycin A1
(an inhibitor of lysosome acidification
) or MG132 (a proteasome inhibitor
)
prior to LIPTAC1 treatment. Bafilomycin A1 inhibited PD-L1 degradation,
while MG132 did not (
Figure
c), suggesting that LIPTAC-mediated protein degradation occurs
predominantly by delivery to the lysosome.
3
LIPTAC-mediated degradation
of multiple extracellular proteins.
(a,b) Schematic illustration of PD-L1 targeting LIPTAC, and Western
blot showing total degradation of PD-L1 on MDA-MB-231 cells following
24 h treatment of 50 nM monomeric anti-PD-L1 parent, Atz, or LIPTAC
containing Atz. Percent PD-L1 levels were quantified by ImageJ relative
to PBS control. Each sample was tested in biological triplicate and
error bars represent standard deviations. Statistics were calculated
by unpaired two-tailed student
t
test. *
P
< 0.05. **
P
< 0.01. (c) Western blot analysis
showing lysosome-dependent PD-L1 degradation on MDA-MB-231 cells.
Cells were pretreated with either 500 nM Bafilomycin A (BafA) or 500
nM MG132 for 1 h followed by 24 h treatment with 50 nM LIPTAC. (d)
Schematic illustration of HER2-targeting LIPTAC and Western blot analysis
showing total HER2 degradation on MCF7 cells following 24 h treatment
of monomeric Traz, LIPTAC and KineTAC. Percent ERBB2 (HER2) levels
were quantified by ImageJ relative to PBS control. Data represent
at least two independent experiments. (e) Schematic illustration of
CXCR4-targeting LIPTAC and Western blot analysis showing total CXCR4
degradation on HeLa cells following 24 h treatment of Nb monomer,
monomeric 142F1, or LIPTAC. (f,g) Schematic illustration of cleaved
CDCP1 (cCDCP1)-targeting LIPTAC and degradation of CDCP1 in PL45 cells
following 24 h treatment of 50 nM cCDCP1 binder CL03 IgG, full-length
CDCP1 (flCDCP1) binder 4A06 IgG, or cCDCP1-specific LIPTAC. Each sample
was tested in biological triplicate and error bars represent standard
deviations. Statistics were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student
t
test. *
P
< 0.05. **
P
< 0.01. ns, not significant.
Next, we targeted HER2, which is frequently upregulated
in cancer
and linked to breast cancer invasiveness and tumor progression.
We generated an HER2-targeting LIPTAC by incorporating
anti-HER2 trastuzumab (Traz) scFv with our LDLR Fab. Treatment of
MCF7 cells with the Traz-LIPTAC resulted in efficient HER2 degradation
(
Figure
d). We then
sought to evaluate degradation of multipass transmembrane proteins,
such as G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). We targeted CXCR4, a
chemokine receptor involved in tumor growth and metastasis.
The CXCR4-targeting LIPTAC was built using a
CXCR4 antagonizing nanobody (Nb)
on one
arm and the LDLR 142F1 Fab on the other arm of the Fc. Western blotting
showed significant CXCR4 degradation after 24 h treatment of Nb-LIPTAC,
and not by the Nb monomer (
Figure
e). The antigen-targeting arm of LIPTAC can be flexibly
incorporated into various antibody formats, including Fab fragments,
scFvs, and Nbs.
Additionally, we investigated CUB domain-containing
protein 1 (CDCP1),
which is highly overexpressed in RAS-driven cancers and undergoes
ectodomain cleavage by extracellular proteases on cancer cells but
not healthy cells.
−
We previously developed two antibody clones: 4A06,
which targets both full-length and cleaved forms of CDCP1, and CL03,
which selectively recognizes the cleaved form for enhanced tumor specificity.
We found that 4A06 IgG was efficiently internalized,
leading to the downregulation of both full-length and cleaved CDCP1
(
Figure
f). In contrast,
CL03 IgG alone did not induce CDCP1 degradation. However, the CL03-based
LIPTAC selectively and efficiently degraded cleaved CDCP1, without
affecting the full-length form, in PL45 cells (
Figure
f,g
). Overall, these results
highlight the versatility of the LIPTAC platform in selectively degrading
a range of extracellular membrane proteins and even isoforms.
Improved Modality of Target Cell Killing via Degrader Drug Conjugates
Both toxin delivery by ADCs and protein degradation by eTPD require
internalization, delivery, and proteolysis of the lysosome. We hypothesized
that eTPD coupled to an ADC could be used to enhance the potency of
an ADC in situations where the target of the ADC was not optimized
for lysosomal trafficking (
Figure
a). Our data here show that the Ctx-IgG only partially
induces EGFR degradation (
Figure
e). Given that Ctx-LIPTAC efficiently degrades EGFR,
we selected Ctx ADC as a test case and a DDC.
4
Development of degrader–drug
conjugates (DDCs) for potent
target cell killing. (a) Schematic illustration of LIPTAC-DDCs where
the membrane POI is internalized by endocytosis and the cytotoxic
payload is released from cleavable linkers in the lysosome. (b) A
payload cleavage assay in EGFR-expressing A431 cells. Cells were treated
with 25 nM of antibodies conjugated with lysolight deep red (LLDR)
dyes. Images were captured every 2 h for 72 h on the Incucyte. Total
integrated intensity was calculated by NIRCU × μm
2
/image. Error bars represented standard deviations for four biological
replicates. Statistics were calculated by one-way ANOVA and Holm–Sidak
multiple comparisons test. (c,d) Cytotoxicity of Ctx-ADC, monomeric
142F1-ADC, and Ctx-DDC either in LIPTAC or KineTAC formats on A431
and MDA-MB-231 cells, respectively. After 72 h incubation, cell viability
was measured using the CellTiter-Glo Reagent. EC
50
values
were calculated using “One-Site Fit LogIC50” regression
in GraphPad Prism 10.2. (e) Cytotoxicity of ADCs and corresponding
DDCs on A431 cells in the presence and absence of the lysosomal inhibitor,
BafA. Dead cells were labeled by cytotoxic green dye after 48 h of
treatment. Dashed lines represented 50 nM BafA treatment together
with antibodies. Total integrated intensity was calculated by GreenCU
× μm
2
/image on the Incucyte. (f) Cytotoxicity
of 0.8 nM DDCs on A431 cells in the presence of 50 nM BafA, 50 nM
MG132, and 1 μM Nystatin, respectively. Cells treated with inhibitors
alone showed no cytotoxicity at the concentrations used in DDC treatments.
Dead cells were labeled by 1 μg/mL propidium iodide after 48
h of treatment. Total integrated intensity was calculated by ROCU
× μm
2
/image on the Incucyte. Error bars represent
standard deviations of four biological replicates. Statistics were
calculated by unpaired two-tailed student
t
test.
****
P
< 0.0001. ns, not significant.
To evaluate the drug release efficiency of DDCs,
we conjugated
a cathepsin-dependent fluorescent probe, LysoLight Deep Red (LLDR),
to monitor the lysosomal catabolism of internalized proteins.
The antibody–probe conjugate was linked
via a valine-citrulline (Vc) linker and remains nonfluorescent until
cleavage by lysosomal cathepsins, which generates a bright fluorescent
signal and serves as a surrogate for an ADC. We found that Ctx-DDC
based conjugates, in either a KineTAC or LIPTAC form, showed much
more efficient internalization and lysosomal trafficking compared
to Ctx-IgG ADC (
Figure
b,
Figure S7a
), suggesting enhanced drug
delivery efficiency for the DDC.
Next, we evaluated the toxicity
of Ctx-DDC by conjugating it to
VcMMAE as the cytotoxic payload. MMAE is an auristatin derivative
that inhibits tubulin polymerization with a cleavable VC linker.
To compare the cell killing potency of DDCs
and Ctx ADC, we conjugated VcMMAE to monomeric 142F1, LIPTAC1, LIPTAC3
(bispecific format with 142F1 scFv and Ctx Fab), KineTAC, and Ctx
IgG, respectively (
Figure S7b
). The average
drug–antibody ratio (DAR) was 2.6, as estimated using 2,4-dinitrophenol
(DNP)-PEG4 conjugation with the same method (
Table S2
). First, we confirmed that antibodies after drug conjugation
retained binding to EGFR
+
cells (
Figure S7c
). Next, we evaluated the potencies of the DDCs in the EGFR
high
A431 cells. The Ctx ADC exhibited an IC
50
of
0.9 nM, while the LIPTAC and KineTAC DDCs significantly enhanced the
potency by 18-fold and 7-fold, respectively (
Figure
c). We then assessed the cytotoxicity in
EGFR
medium
MDA-MB-231 cells, which others have shown are
relatively insensitive to Ctx-VcMMAE due to the low receptor expression.
After 72 h of treatment, the Ctx ADC induced
only moderate cytotoxicity, even at the highest ADC concentration
(
Figure
d). The single
arm anti-LDLR 142F1-VcMMAE also exhibited weak cell killing potency,
suggesting that LIPTAC binding is primarily driven by the higher-affinity
Ctx arm (
Figure
d,
Figure S7c
). Remarkably, all bispecific DDCs,
including LIPTAC1-VcMMAE, LIPTAC3-VcMMAE, and KineTAC-VcMMAE, potently
killed the target cells (
Figure
d), with IC
50
values of 23 pM, 38 pM, and
59 pM, respectively.
We observed similar DDC-mediated killing
potency on PANC-1 cells,
which expressed similar levels of EGFR as MDA-MB-231 (
Figure S7d
). None of the antibodies without payload
were significantly toxic to cells over 3 days of treatment (
Figure S7e
), suggesting that the cytotoxicity
is mediated by internalization and release of the degrader conjugated
MMAE. The cytotoxicity of ADC and DDCs was minimal on EGFR negative
MCF7 cells and K562 cells, whereas free MMAE effectively killed these
cells (
Figure S7f,g
). These results demonstrate
that cytotoxicity is mediated by specific antibody-directed delivery
rather than adventitious drug release and that the tumor-associated
antigen arm dictates target cell recognition.
We also evaluated
the lysosomal dependency of cell killing using
an incucyte-based killing assay. Accumulation of cell death was still
detectable when cells were treated with as low as 0.4 nM DDCs, while
the cell death was not detectable with Ctx-ADC or 142F1-ADC (
Figure
e,
Figure S7h
). Bafilomycin A treatment abolished the cytotoxicity
of both ADC and DDCs, further indicating the requirement of lysosomal
release of the cytotoxic payload (
Figure
e). We further treated cells with chemical
inhibitors of several endocytic pathways. Inhibitors of proteasomes
(MG132) or caveolar-mediated endocytosis (Nystatin)
,
did not significantly affect the cytotoxicity of the DDCs, highlighting
receptor-mediated lysosomal delivery (
Figure
f). Together, these data suggest that DDCs
improve lysosomal delivery of cytotoxic payloads and enhance the cytotoxic
potency.
Degrader–Drug Conjugates Improved Cytotoxicity on Cells
with Moderate Antigen Expression Levels
To evaluate whether
DDCs can enhance the drug delivery efficiency of these ADCs, we selected
several clinically relevant ADC targets: B cell maturation antigen
(BCMA, target of Belantamab
,
), cleaved CDCP1 (target
of CL03
), and trophoblast cell surface
antigen 2 (TROP2, target of Sacituzumab
). We engineered these therapeutically relevant antibodies into corresponding
LIPTAC formats and conjugated them to VcMMAE at DARs similar to those
of EGFR-targeting DDCs.
BCMA is highly expressed in malignant
plasma cells and represents a validated target in multiple myeloma.
Belantamab mafodotin (Blenrep) is a novel ADC composed of an anti-BCMA
antibody conjugated to MMAF via a noncleavable linker.
In RPMI-8226 cells, which express moderate levels
of BCMA (normalized transcript per million (nTPM) = 171), Belantamab-LIPTAC
demonstrated more efficient internalization than Belantamab (
Figure
a). Both ADCs and
DDCs retained binding affinity comparable to that of their unconjugated
counterparts (
Figure S8a
). In the luciferase-based
viability assay, LIPTAC DDCs improved potency in RPMI-8226 cells by
4-fold, reducing the EC
50
from 85 to 22 nM. The effect
was not observed in MM1.S cells with higher BCMA expression (nTPM
= 481) (
Figure S8b
). Notably, RPMI-8226
and MM1.S cells express comparable levels of LDLR (nTPM = 41 and 55,
respectively). By annexin V and propidium iodide staining, LIPTAC
DDCs significantly enhanced cell death by 18-fold in RPMI-8226 and
5-fold in MM1.S cells (
Figure
b,
Figure S8c
). This difference
may be due to incomplete killing by DDCs in BCMA
+
cells,
where annexin V staining captures early apoptotic events. Overexpression
of BCMA in RPMI-8226 cells rendered both LIPTAC DDC and Belantamab
ADC comparably potent (
Figure S8d,e
), suggesting
that LIPTAC-mediated trafficking offers the greatest advantage in
cells with moderate antigen expression.
5
Comparison of clinically
relevant ADCs and the DDC counterparts.
(a) Antibody internalization assay in RPMI8226 cells, a multiple myeloma
cell line, treated with 100 nM of LLDR dye-labeled antibodies. An
anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike antibody CC12.1
was used as the isotype control. Images were captured every 2 h
for 72 h on the Incucyte. Each sample was tested in biological triplicate,
and error bars represent the standard deviations. (b) Cytotoxicity
of anti-BCMA Belantamab (Belan) ADC or the corresponding LIPTAC-DDC
after 4 days incubation with RPMI8226 and MM1.S cells. To monitor
cell death, cells were stained with APC-annexin V and propidium iodide
(PI) and analyzed by flow cytometry. Each sample was tested in biological
triplicate and error bars represent standard deviations. (c) Antibody
internalization assay in CAPAN1 cells, a pancreatic cancer cell line,
treated with 100 nM of LLDR dye-labeled antibodies. Images were captured
every 2 h for 72 h on the Incucyte. Each sample was tested in biological
triplicate and error bars represent the standard deviations. (d,e)
Cytotoxicity of pan-CDCP1-targeting 4A06 ADC, cCDCP1-targeting CL03-ADC,
or cCDCP1-targeting LIPTAC-DDC after 48 h incubation with (d) CAPAN1
cells or (e) HPAC cells. Cell viability was measured using the CellTiter-Glo
reagent. Each sample was tested in biological triplicate and error
bars represent standard deviations. (f) Antibody internalization assay
in TROP2-expressing A431 cells treated with 100 nM of LLDR dye-labeled
antibodies. Images were captured every 2 h for 72 h on the Incucyte.
Each sample was tested in biological triplicate and error bars represent
the standard deviations. (g) Cytotoxicity of monomeric Sacituzumab
(mSac)-ADC, Sac-ADC, and LIPTAC-DDC after 3 days incubation with TROP2
high
A431 or TROP2
medium
PL45 cells. Each sample
was tested in biological triplicate and error bars represent standard
deviations. EC
50
values were calculated using “One-Site
Fit LogIC50” regression in GraphPad Prism 10.2.
We next examined CDCP1, a protein overexpressed
in RAS-driven cancers.
The cleavage-specific antibody CL03 has previously been shown to localize
to tumors and exhibit antitumor activity with improved safety profiles,
but it demonstrated limited internalization
(
Figure
c) and inefficient
degradation of cCDCP1 (
Figure
f). In contrast, CL03-LIPTAC internalized efficiently in pancreatic
cancer CAPAN1 cells, comparable to the pan-CDCP1-targeting antibody
4A06 (
Figure
c). Moreover,
the cCDCP1-directed DDC induced cytotoxicity in CAPAN1 cells to a
level similar to that of the pan-CDCP1-targeting 4A06-ADC, whereas
CL03-ADC showed no activity (
Figure
d). Importantly, neither the cCDCP1-targeting ADC nor
DDC exhibited cytotoxicity in HPAC cells (
Figure
e), which lack proteolytically cleaved CDCP1,
further underscoring the selectivity of this
approach.
Then, we investigated TROP2, a clinically validated
ADC target
of sacituzumab govitecan,
,
,
which carries an average DAR of 7.6. TROP2 is known to undergo rapid
internalization upon antibody binding, with a reported internalization
half-life (
t
1/2
) of approximately 30 min.
TROP2-LIPTAC showed a modest enhancement in
internalization (
Figure
f). While the LIPTAC DDC did not further increase cytotoxicity in
TROP2
high
A431 (nTPM = 1085) or TROP2
medium
PL45
(nTPM = 358) cells (
Figure
g), it demonstrated substantially greater potency compared
with the monomeric sacituzumab ADC (
Figure
g). These findings suggest that avidity effects
or receptor clustering
,
may enhance lysosomal trafficking
and payload delivery, supporting the potential of multispecific antibody
designs with two antigen-binding arms and one recycling receptor arm
to improve drug delivery against rapidly internalizing targets such
as TROP2.
Overall, these results indicate that DDCs can provide
added benefit
in contexts where the parental ADC is limited, such as target-low
settings, or when internalization is inefficient. When the ADC is
in high abundance and a good recycler, the benefit of a DDC is clearly
less. These findings underscore the importance of target selection
and receptor biology in guiding the DDC design.
Discussion
DDCs represent a new class of hybrid therapeutics
that intentionally
integrates the efficient lysosomal trafficking of eTPD with the cytotoxic
payload delivery of ADCs. Our results show that DDCs outperform conventional
ADCs in lysosomal trafficking and cytotoxic activity, underscoring
the importance of intracellular routing as a key determinant of ADC
efficacy. In head-to-head comparisons, EGFR-targeting Ctx-DDCs outperformed
Ctx-based ADCs in terms of lysosomal trafficking and cytotoxicity.
Tumor selectivity was conferred by the high-affinity Ctx arm,
as LDLR-targeting alone exhibited weak activity.
DDCs exhibited minimal toxicity to cells without EGFR expression,
further highlighting that DDC specificity stems from the tumor antigen-binding
domain.
Within this framework, the LIPTACs extend the scope
of eTPD by
exploiting LDLR’s exceptionally rapid and durable recycling
capacity. LDLR can complete one endocytic cycle approximately every
12 min and recycle up to 150 times.
LIPTACs
enabled efficient and selective degradation of diverse membrane proteins
and further demonstrated that the LDLR can function as a powerful
trafficking hub to enhance payload delivery in the DDC format. We
have not observed a hook effect, though this may depend on POI and
LDLR expression levels and the very high concentrations typically
required to reach the hook zone. More broadly, eTPD technologies such
as LIPTAC and KineTAC complement ADCs by ensuring robust lysosomal
delivery, thereby addressing a key bottleneck in ADC pharmacology.
Our data suggest that LIPTAC is recycled after
lysosomal delivery, while its payload is cleaved and released in the
lysosome. Whether LIPTAC acts catalytically remains unclear. Lysosomal
fluorescent signals appear within 4–6 h and plateau by 72 h,
consistent with typical eTPD kinetics.
These findings indicate that LDLR recycling and payload release
occur on similar time scales, though precise rate comparisons will
require future quantitative studies.
The therapeutic potency
of ADCs depends on the antigen abundance,
receptor internalization, and payload potency. Our results suggest
that DDCs can provide a distinct advantage in settings where conventional
ADCs are limited, such as receptors with low expression or poor internalization
(e.g., BCMA on RPMI-8226 cells and cCDCP1 on CAPAN1 cells). This benefit
was less pronounced for highly expressed or efficiently internalizing
antigens, as seen with BCMA-overexpressing cells or TROP2-expressing
cells, where the DDC format performed comparably to that of benchmark
ADCs. Reduced avidity and lower binding affinities of bispecific DDCs
likely also contribute to these differences, pointing toward future
engineering opportunities.
The efficiency of target degradation
depends on the balance of
the affinities between the tumor-targeting and recycling arms of bispecific
DDCs. To increase selectivity, it is critical that the tumor-binding
affinity be high while the recycling affinity be low, ensuring that
the DDC engages tumor antigens first rather than the recycling receptor.
Future designs may incorporate multispecific formats, but the choice
of recycling receptors must emphasize tumor-specific expression to
minimize on-target, off-tumor activity.
The modularity of the
DDC format suggests broader applications
beyond the classical tumor antigens. It may expand druggability to
unconventional, tumor-selective targets such as post-translational
modifications
,
and tumor-specific neo-antigens.
Optimization of antigen-targeting arms and the
use of heterobifunctional degraders could reduce DAR requirements,
minimize off-target effects, and broaden the therapeutic window.
Finally, a major limitation of eTPD approaches is incomplete degradation,
which may be insufficient to fully suppress
oncogenic signaling. The DDC format overcomes this by delivering cytotoxic
payloads directly to tumor cells independent of full protein clearance.
This platform can be expanded to carry diverse therapeutic cargos
including radionuclides, kinase inhibitors, or proteolysis-targeting
chimeras (PROTACs). Together, the DDC modality represents a promising
next-generation hybrid strategy for targeted cancer therapy.
Materials and Methods
Plasmid Construction
All the IgGs were constructed
in a pcDNA3.4 vector that expresses the light chain and heavy chain,
respectively, for mammalian expression. For generating bispecific
antibody, the heavy chain variable regions or scFvs were cloned into
zymework-A mutant Fc and zymework-B Fc sequences, respectively. Antigen
was cloned into pFuse vector with IL-2 signal peptide followed by
tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease, Fc, and Avitag sequences in the
C-terminus. All of the Fabs were constructed in a dual-expression
pBL347 vector that expresses the light chain and the heavy chain with
the pelB and the stII signal peptides, respectively, for the periplasm
expression.
Cell Lines
HEK293T, HeLa, MDA-MB-231, PANC-1, A431,
and HPAC cells were cultured in DMEM (ThermoFisher Scientific) with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin.
MCF7 cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin,
1% sodium pyruvate, and 1% nonessential amino acid. NCI-H1975, HCC1143,
PL45, BT474, Raji, Ramos, RPMI8226, and MM1.S cells were cultured
in RPMI-1640 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin.
CAPAN-1 cells were cultured in IMDM with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin.
HCC1143 LDLR KO cells were provided by Dr. James Olzmann and were
supplemented with 100 μg/mL hygromycin (Sigma-Aldrich). of Expi293
cells were cultured in FreeStyle 293F medium (ThermoFisher Scientific,
catalog no. A1435103).
Phage Display
Phage selection was done as described
previously.
In brief, library E from
the University of Chicago and the UCSF library were incubated with
streptavidin-coated magnetic beads preconjugated with biotinylated
Fc protein to remove nonspecific binders. Unbounded phage were then
incubated with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads preconjugated with
biotinylated cLDLR-TEV-Fc antigens. After 4 washes, antigen-bound
phages were eluted from beads by incubating with 1 μM TEV protease
for 20 min. In total, four rounds of selections were performed with
decreasing concentrations of cLDLR-antigen (1000, 50, 20, and 10 nM).
From round 3, the phage library was first enriched by protein A magnetic
beads to deplete nondisplayed or truncated Fab phages before each
round of the selection.
Phage ELISA
First, 384-well Maxisorp plates were coated
with Neutravidin (10 μg/mL) overnight at 4 °C and subsequently
blocked with BSA (2% w/v) for 1 h at RT. Then 20 nM biotinylated cLDLR
antigens were captured on the NeutrAvidin-coated wells for 30 min,
followed by the addition of 1:5 diluted single-colony phage for 1
h. The secondary antibodies were either a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated
anti-M13 phage antibody (Sino Biological) for phage ELISA or an antihuman
IgG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) for recombinant protein ELISA. The ELISA
plates were washed three times after each incubation, and antibody
binding was detected by TMB substrate (VWR) and read at 450 nm.
Protein Expression
IgGs and antigens were expressed
in Expi293F cells on a 30 mL scale. In brief, 24 μg of DNA was
added to 3 mL of OptiMEM, followed by 24 μL of the FectoPro
transfection reagents. After 10 min of incubation, 27 mL of Expi293F
cells at 3 million/mL was added and shaken at 37 °C. On the second
day, 300 μL of 300 mM vaporic acid and 270 μL of 45% glucose
were added to the cells. After 5 days of transfection, cells were
harvested, spun down at 4000
g
for 20 min, and filtered
by 0.45 μm steri-flip. Supernatants were then incubated with
Sepharose A resin for 2 h, and proteins were then eluted by 0.1 M
acetic acid and neutralized by Tris pH 11. Proteins were buffer changed
3 times in PBS in amicon tubes. Fabs were expressed in
Escherichia
coli
C43 (DE3) Pro+ grown in an optimized TB autoinduction
medium at 37 °C for 6 h, cooled to 30 °C for 18 h. Cells
were harvested by centrifugation and lysed using B-PER lysis buffer.
The lysate was incubated at 60 °C for 20 min and centrifuged
to remove the inclusion body. The Fabs were purified by Sepharose
A resin via affinity chromatography and buffer exchanged in PBS for
further characterization. Purity and integrity of all proteins were
assessed by SDS–PAGE.
Recombinant Protein ELISA
First, 384-well Maxisorp
plates were coated with Neutravidin (10 μg/mL) or 6x histag
antibody (Invitrogen, catalog no. MA1-21315, 2 μg/mL) overnight
at 4 °C and subsequently blocked with BSA (2% w/v) for 1 h at
RT. Then 20 nM antigens were captured onto precoated wells for 1 h.
Recombinant full-length LDLR, LRP2, LRP8, and VLDLR proteins were
purchased from ACROBiosystems. For polyspecificity ELISAs, the autoantigens
cardiolipin (Sigma, 50 μg/mL), insulin (Sigma, 1 μg/mL),
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, InvivoGen, 10 μg/mL), and single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA, Sigma, 1 μg/mL), were directly coated onto plates
overnight 4 °C. After three washes, serially diluted Fabs were
added to the plates and incubated for 1 h at RT. After three washes,
1:5000 diluted peroxidase–antihuman IgG (H+L) (Jackson ImmunoResearch)
were added to the plates and incubated for 30 min. After three wash
cycles, antibody binding was detected by TMB substrate (VWR), quenched
by 1 M phosphoric acid, and read at 450 nm.
Flow Cytometry
Cells were collected by centrifugation
at 400
g
for 5 min. Pellets were washed once with
PBS + 1% BSA. Cells were incubated with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies
in PBS + 1% BSA for 15 min at RT or 30 min at 4 °C. Cells were
washed three times and resuspended in cold PBS for flow analysis.
Antibodies used included APC anti-LDLR (Invitrogen, catalog no. MA5-40994,
1:400), PE antihuman EGFR (Invitrogen, catalog no. MA5-28544, 1:400),
Alexa fluor 647 goat antihuman IgG (H+L) (Invitrogen, catalog A-21445,
1:1000), APC annexin V (BioLegend, catalog no. 640920, 1:500), Alexa
Fluor 647-conjugated protein A (Invitrogen, catalog no.
P21462
, 1:1000).
Dead cell staining included propidium iodide (Biolegend, catalog no.
421301, 1:250), and a LIVE/DEAD fixable violet dead cell stain kit
(Invitrogen, catalog no.
L34964
). Flow cytometry was performed using
a CytoFLEX cytometer (Beckman Coulter, version 2.3.1.22) and CytoExpert
software (version 2.3.1.22). Data were analyzed with FlowJo (v.10.8.0).
Biolayer Interferometry
BLI experiments were performed
at room temperature by using an Octet RED384 instrument (ForteBio),
20 nM biotinylated antigen-Fc was immobilized on an optically transparent
SA biosensor (ForteBio). Different concentrations of monomeric Fab
antibodies in kinetic buffer (PBS, 0.05% Tween-20, and 0.2% BSA) were
used as the analyte in a 384-well microplate (Greiner Bio-One). Because
the Fc format presents antigens bivalently on the sensor surface,
affinities (
K
D
s) were best fit with a
2:1 heterogeneous ligand model and calculated by a global fit analysis
using the Octet RED384 Data Analysis HT software.
Epitope Binning by BLI
Anti-LDLR antibodies were binned
into epitope specificities using an Octet RED384 system. Then 20 nM
biotinylated cLDLR-Fc antigens were captured using streptavidin biosensors
(Fortebio). After antigen loading, a saturating concentration of antibodies
(200 nM) was added for 10 min. Competing concentrations of antibodies
(40 nM) were then added for 5 min to measure the binding in the presence
of saturating antibodies. All incubation steps were performed in PBS/0.05%
Tween-20/0.2% BSA. For PCSK9 epitope binning, all incubation steps
and protein dilution were performed at acidic endosomal pH to increase
PCSK9 binding affinity.
Then 200 nM concentration
of PCSK9 D374Y (AcroBiosystems) was added for 10 min after antigen
loading. Then 40 nM PCSK9 D374Y, 142F1, or 142F6 was added for 5 min.
LDL Uptake Assay
LDL uptake was measured by the Image-iT
pHrodo Red Low Density Lipoprotein Uptake Kit (Thermo Scientific,
catalog no.
I34360
) following manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, HeLa cells were seeded at 5000 cells/well on a 96-well polystyrene
tissue culture treated plate (Corning, catalog no. 3596). The next
day, media was removed, and cells were serum starved for 12 h. Next,
cells were pretreated with unlabeled LDL, heparin, and anti-LDLR Fabs
for 30 min at 37 °C, respectively, followed by pHrodo red-labeled
LDL treatment. Cells were then imaged by Incucyte (Sartorius) every
1 to 2 h. Internalization was calculated by total integrated intensity
(ROCU × μm
2
/image) on the Incucyte software.
Degradation Experiments
Cells were plated in 6- or
12-well plates and grown to ∼70% confluency before treatment.
On the next day, cell culture medium was aspirated, and various concentrations
of antibodies in 1 mL of culture medium were then added to each well.
Cells were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C prior to flow cytometry
or Western blotting experiments.
Western Blotting
Cells were lifted with PBS + 0.05%
EDTA, transferred to Eppendorf tubes, spun down at 500 g for 4 min,
and washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed with 1× RIPA lysis
buffer (EMD Millipore) with cOmplete mini protease inhibitor cocktail
(Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 °C for 20 min. Lysates were centrifuged
at 20,000
g
for 10 min at 4 °C to remove debris.
Soluble protein concentrations were quantified by Rapid Gold BCA Protein
Assay Kit (Pierce). Lysates were mixed with 4× Nupage LDS Sample
Buffer (Invitrogen) and 2-mercaptoethanol, and then run on NuPAGE
4–12% Bis Tris Protein Gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins
were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes using the
iBlot2 Western Blotting Transfer System (Thermo Scientific). Membranes
were blocked with TBS + 5% BSA + 0.5% Tween for 1 h, and stained with
primary antibodies overnight. After three washes, membranes were stained
with secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT. After three washes, membranes
were imaged with a LICOR imager or the ChemiDoc MP imaging system
(BioRad). Antibodies used included rabbit anti-human EGFR (Cell Signaling
Technology, catalog no. 4267S, 1:1000), rabbit anti-human PD-L1 (Cell
Signaling Technology, catalog no. 13684S, 1:1000), rabbit anti-human
CXCR4 (Cell Signaling Technology, catalog no. 64837S, 1:1000), rabbit
anti-human ERBB2 (Cell Signaling Technology, catalog no. 4290S, 1:1000),
rabbit anti-human CDCP1 (Cell Signaling Technology, catalog no. 13794S,
1:1000), mouse anti-human α-tubulin (Cell Signaling Technology,
3873S, 1:3000), goat anti-human LDLR (R&D Systems, catalog no.
AF2148, 1:1000), IRDye 800CW goat anti-rabbit IgG (LI-COR Biosciences,
catalog no. 926-32211), IRDye 680RD goat anti-mouse IgG (LI-COR Biosciences,
catalog no. 926-68070, 1:5000), IRDye 800CW donkey anti-goat IgG (LI-COR
Biosciences, catalog no. 926-32214, 1:5000), and peroxidase goat anti-rabbit
IgG (H+L) (Jackson ImmunoResearch, catalog no. 111-035-144, 1:5000).
Confocal Microscopy
HeLa cells were plated on the chambered
coverslip (Ibidi, 8-well uncoated) and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C.
Cells were then treated with 50 nM bispecific or control antibodies
in complete growth medium. After 24 h of incubation at 37 °C,
medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with PBS. Cells on the
coverslips were fixed with paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 min at RT,
then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X in PBS for 10 min at RT. After
three washes with PBS, the samples were stained with anti-LAMP1 rabbit
antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, cat. no. 9091T), anti-EGFR mouse
antibody (Thermo Scientific, catalog no. MA5-13070), and DAPI (Cell
Signaling Technologies). Goat antirabbit IgG 488 (Invitrogen, catalog
no. A-11008) and goat antimouse IgG 647 (Invitrogen, catalog no. A-21240)
were stained for visualization. Samples were imaged using a Nikon
Ti Microscope with a Yokogawa CSU-22 spinning disk confocal and a
60× objective lens; 405-, 488-, and 647 nm lasers were used to
image DAPI, LAMP1 and EGFR, respectively. Images were deconvoluted
and processed by using NIS-Element (v5.21.03) and Fiji software (v2.1.0)
packages.
Cell Culture/Stable Isotope Labeling Using Amino Acids in Cell
Culture (SILAC) Labeling
MDA-MB-231 cells were grown in DMEM
for SILAC (Thermo Fisher) with 10% dialyzed FBS (Gemini). Medium was
also supplemented with either light L-[
12
C
6
,
14
N
2
]-lysine/l-[
12
C
6
,
14
N
4
]-arginine (Sigma) or heavy L-[
13
C
6
,
15
N
2
]-lysine/L-[
13
C
6
,
15
N
4
]-arginine (Cambridge Isotope
Laboratories). Cells were maintained in SILAC medium for five passages
to ensure complete isotopic labeling. Heavy-labeled cells were treated
with PBS control, and light-labeled cells were treated with 50 nM
bispecific LIPTAC for 48 h before cells were collected. Cells were
then used to prepare surface-proteome enrichment.
Mass Spectrometry
For proteomic analysis, cells were
processed following established cell surface capture methods.
Approximately 2 million SILAC-labeled cells
were first washed in PBS (pH 6.5) before the glycoproteins were mildly
oxidized with 1.6 mM sodium periodate (Sigma) in PBS (pH 6.5) for
20 min at 4 °C. Cells were then biotinylated via the oxidized
vicinal diols with 1 mM biocytin hydrazide (Biotium) in the presence
of 10 mM aniline (Sigma) in PBS (pH 6.5) for 90 min at 4 °C.
Cell pellets were lysed with a 2× dilution of commercial RIPA
buffer (Millipore) supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail
(Sigma) and 2 mM EDTA (Sigma) for 10 min at 4 °C. Cells were
further disrupted with probe sonication (20% amplitude, 5 min, 4 °C),
followed by cell debris removal (20,000
g
, 10 min,
4 °C), and the clarified cell lysates were then incubated with
50 μL of high-capacity NeutrAvidin-coated agarose beads (Thermo)
in Poly-Prep chromatography columns (Bio-Rad) for 2 h at 4 °C
to isolate biotinylated glycoproteins. To enrich for biotinylated
proteins, the resin was washed sequentially with 5 mL of 1× RIPA
(Millipore) plus 1 mM EDTA, 5 mL of high-salt PBS (20 mM phosphate
(pH 7.4) with 1 M NaCl (Sigma)) and 5 mL of denaturing urea buffer
(50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2 M urea). Proteins on the beads were
next reduced, carbidomethylated, digested, and desalted using the
Preomics iST mass spectrometry sample preparation kit (Preomics) per
the manufacturer’s recommendations. After desalting, samples
were dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and quantified using
the Pierce peptide quantification kit (Thermo Scientific) before liquid
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis.
Liquid
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry was performed by using
a Bruker NanoElute chromatography system coupled to a Bruker timsTOF
Pro mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a prepacked IonOpticks
Aurora (25 cm × 75 μm) C18 reversed-phase column (1.6-μm
pore size, Thermo) fitted with a CaptiveSpray emitter for the timsTOF
Pro CaptiveSpray source. For all samples, 200 ng of resuspended peptides
was injected and separated using a linear gradient of 2–23%
solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; solvent
B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min at 400 μL
min 1 with a final ramp to 34% B over 10 min. Separations were performed
at a column temperature of 50 °C. Data-dependent acquisition
was performed using a timsTOF PASEF tandem mass spectrometry method
(TIMS mobility scan range of 0.70–1.50 V•s cm
2
, mass scan range of 100–1700
m
/
z
, ramp time of 100 ms, 10 PASEF scans per 1.17 s, active exclusion
of 24 s, charge range of 0–5 and minimum MS1 intensity of 500).
The normalized collision energy was set at 20.
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis
LC-MS-MS data was analyzed
using PEAKS online Xpro 1.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.; Ontario,
Canada). Spectral searches were performed in PEAKS Q (de novo assisted
Quantification) mode. The precursor mass error tolerance was set to
20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5. Peptides
containing 6 and 45 amino acids in length were then searched in a
semispecific trypsin/LysC digest mode against a proteome file that
contains human cell surface proteins. Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214
Da) on cysteines was a set static modification; methionine oxidation
(+15.994) and the isotopic labels (13C(6)­15N(2); 13C(6)­15N(4)) were
set variable modifications. Quantified peptides were matched between
three experimental replicates, and peptide enrichments were normalized
based on the total ion chromatograph (TIC). SILAC-labeled protein
ratios were further analyzed if the proteins were identified by more
than one peptide and were present in at least two experimental replicates.
A
p
-value of 0.05 and 2-fold protein ratio differences
were set as cutoffs to determine if protein abundance differences
were significant between vehicle treated cells and LIPTAC-treated
cells. Proteomic data are available on PRIDE with PXD064642 accession
code.
Lysolight Deep Red Assay
Antibodies were labeled using
the LysoLight Antibody Labeling Kits (Invitrogen, cat. no.
L36003
)
following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, antibodies
were labeled with LLDR with a molar ratio of 1:6 in the presence of
100 mM sodium bicarbonate (pH 8.4) for 2 h at RT. Antibodies were
then purified with 7k Zeba dye and biotin removal columns (Thermo
Scientific, catalog no. A44297). Cells were seeded at 5000/well on
a 96-well polystyrene tissue culture treated plate (Corning, catalog
no. 3596). The next day, media was removed, treated with LLDR-labeled
antibodies, and then imaged on the Incucyte every 2 h for 72 h.
In Vitro
ADC Assays
IgGs were labeled
with NHS ester-PEG4-ValCit-PAB-MMAE (BroadPharm, catalog no. BP-25503)
with a 1:6 or 1:10 molar ratio at RT for 2 h with 100 mM sodium bicarbonate.
Antibodies were then desalted using Pierce Zeba desalt spin columns
(Thermo Scientific). For adherent cells, 5000 cells/well were seeded
on a 96-well polylysine-coated white plate (Corning, catalog no. 3917).
The next day, media was aspirated, and MMAE-labeled IgGs were added
and incubated for 72 h in cell culture medium at 37 °C. For suspension
cells, 6000 cells/well were incubated with ADCs or DDCs for 96 h at
37 °C. Viability was measured using CellTiter-Glo Reagent (Promega).
For the incucyte-based killing assay, the cells were treated with
ADCs or DDCs in cell culture medium at 37 °C, cytotoxic green
dye (Sartorius, catalog no. 4633, 1:10000) or propidium Iodide (Biolegend,
catalog no. 42130, 2 μg/mL). For compound inhibitor assay, 0.8
nM DDCs were incubated with 1 μg/mL propidium iodide with or
without 50 nM Bafilomycin A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog no.
sc-201550A), 50 nM MG132 (Selleck Chemicals, cat. no. S2619), or 1
μM Nystatin (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-17409), respectively.
Characterization of DAR
IgGs were side-by-side labeled
with DNP-PEG4-NHS ester (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-140614) with
the same molar ratio as the MMAE conjugation and incubated at RT for
2 h with 100 mM sodium bicarbonate. Antibodies were then desalted
using the Pierce Zeba desalt spin columns (Thermo Scientific). The
absorbance of conjugated antibodies at 280 and 360 nm was measured
by UV–vis spectrophotometer. The correction factor (CF) was
determined by measuring A280 and A360 of the pure 100 μM DNP-PEG4-NHS
ester solution.
DAR
=
A
360
ε
DNP
/
(
A
280
−
(
A
360
×
CF
)
ε
protein
)
Supplementary Material