Introduction
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics
has become an indispensable
tool to investigate the role of proteins in biological systems. Such
insights are predominantly obtained with bottom-up proteomics, which
involves the mass spectrometric analysis of peptides produced from
enzymatic digestion of the relevant protein samples, with the resulting
data subjected to a relative quantitative comparison.
While advances in MS technology enables thousands of proteins
to be routinely identified from a single liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry (LC–MS) analysis,
,
the sample
preparation procedure contributes enormously toward obtaining consistent
and deeper proteome coverage.
Achieving reproducible proteomic
coverage is often afflicted by
protein or peptide losses that occur from the onerous and multistep
nature of sample preparation. Recent approaches to minimizing these
effects include: performing the sample processing and peptide cleanup
in a single vial,
−
decreasing the number of sample processing steps,
miniaturization of the sample volumes and associated handling
equipment,
as well as the use of automation
for high-throughput studies.
These improvements
have been instrumental in single cell proteomics
and the emerging field of deep visual proteomics.
While users are conscious of minimizing losses
during sample preparation, it has been challenging to determine the
precise origin of those losses for several reasons. Proteinaceous
measurements are typically only performed at the start and end of
sample preparation, such that if sample loss did occur, it would be
difficult to pinpoint which step was responsible. Additionally, if
quantification of the sample loss was desired, the incompatibility
of sample preparation reagents with protein quantification assays
makes this difficult.
Surfactants used
to extract and solubilize proteins, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS),
,
can interfere with the Bradford assay,
while reducing agents, such as dithiothreitol
(DTT),
are incompatible with the bicinchoninic
acid assay.
Although these methods could
be implemented at various stages to overcome these incompatibilities,
performing several quantification methods becomes highly impractical.
A single assay that is refractory to the effects of sample preparation
reagents would be desirable for accurate protein quantification.
Of the three fluorescent amino acids, tryptophan is the most suitable
for investigating protein structure, with excitation at 295 nm resulting
in almost exclusively tryptophan fluorescence.
,
In addition to exhibiting the largest molar extinction coefficient
and quantum yield,
the indole ring is
sensitive to changes in its local environment, which has been exploited
to investigate protein conformational changes
and interactions.
Despite the sensitivity
of fluorescent measurements to polarity of the local environment,
temperature,
pH,
and electron scavengers,
these intrinsic effects can be considerably mitigated when
the proteins are unfolded in highly denaturing conditions.
,
Wiśniewski and Gaugaz
successfully
demonstrated that in these environments, tryptophan fluorescence can
be used for the quantification of proteins and peptides in complex
biological mixtures, even in the presence of reagents that interfere
with other quantification assays.
Tryptophan fluorescence has
therefore become an attractive methodology
for protein and peptide quantification. To the best of our knowledge,
this capability has not been used to evaluate the occurrence of protein
and peptide losses during the proteomic sample preparation workflow.
Obtaining such information would not only identify problematic sample
preparation events, but also assist in troubleshooting and optimization
of the workflow to achieve reproducible and higher proteome coverage.
The consequences of unacceptable sample losses not only impact the
capacity to deeply profile the proteome, but also cause abundance
biases in the resulting LC–MS data.
To this end, the ability of tryptophan fluorescence to accurately
quantify proteins and peptides was assessed. When bovine serum albumin
(BSA) was solubilized in 8 M urea, the fluorescence assay provided
an overestimated reading. This anomaly was rectified when additional
protein reduction was performed to sufficiently denature BSA. During
the subsequent in-solution digestion of BSA, we observed a substantial
decrease in the measurable protein content after sample dilution,
but this was predominantly mitigated with the overnight enzymatic
digestion step. Similarly, when 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) was used
for BSA denaturation, considerable protein overestimation was reported
by the fluorescence assay after solubilization, unless a reducing
agent was added to the sample. In contrast, 2% SDS was able to sufficiently
denature BSA and proteins from the more complex TYK-nu cell sample,
without the need for reducing agents in either case. Finally, we demonstrated
the capability of the tryptophan fluorescence assay to quantify BSA
and soy flour protein samples without performing conventional amino
acid analysis, which was facilitated by the calculation and subsequent
validation of appropriate conversion factors. Our study therefore
demonstrates that protein and peptide content can be accurately determined
from tryptophan fluorescence measurements, but requires proteins and
peptides in the sample to be adequately denatured to prevent erroneous
overestimations.
Methods
Materials
Fetal bovine serum was obtained from Bovogen
Biologicals Pty. Ltd. (Keilor East, Australia). The TYK-nu human ovarian
cancer cell line was purchased from CellBank Australia (Westmead,
Australia). HEPES, minimal essential medium, no glutamine and penicillin–streptomycin
antibiotics were obtained from GIBCO (Grand Island, NY). Soy flour
(standard reference material 3234) was purchased from NIST (Gaithersburg,
MD). Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Mass Spectrometry Grade) was obtained from
Promega (Madison, WI). Ammonium hydrogen carbonate (AmBic), BSA, 2-chloroacetamide
(CA), DTT, glutamine, 8 M guanidine hydrochloride solution in water
(BioUltra), iodoacetamide (IAM), phosphate buffered saline (PBS),
protease inhibitor cocktail, SDC, SDS, 0.5 M tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine
(TCEP) hydrochloride solution (pH 7.0), Trizma base, Trizma hydrochloride,
0.25% trypsin–EDTA solution, tryptophan and urea were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The Pierce Bradford Protein Assay
Kit was obtained from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL).
Tryptophan Fluorescence Measurements
Tryptophan (10
mg/mL) was briefly sonicated in 50% ethanol and diluted with 8 M urea/50
mM AmBic to obtain a 0.1 mg/mL stock solution. Calibration series
1 (0.1828 to 11.70 ng/μL tryptophan) and 2 (0.005713 to 0.1828
ng/μL tryptophan) were prepared by dilution with 8 M urea/50
mM AmBic.
A Cary Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrophotometer G9800A
and 40 μL Fluorescence Micro cell (Agilent Technologies, Santa
Clara, CA) was utilized for tryptophan measurements. Tryptophan was
excited at 295 nm (5 nm bandwidth) and the emission intensity measured
at 350 nm (20 nm bandwidth) with an averaging time of 0.1 s. The photomultiplier
tube voltage was set to 560 (calibration series 1) or 800 V (calibration
series 2). The Micro cell was washed with 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic between
each measurement.
Emission profiles were similarly obtained
between 320 and 500 nm
(20 nm bandwidth) with the two photomultiplier tube voltages. The
scan rate was 30 nm/min with an averaging time of 1 s and a data interval
of 0.5 nm. Normalized emission scans for each sample were obtained
by dividing the emission at each wavelength by the 350 nm emission.
The center of spectral mass, also known as the intensity-weighted
average emission wavelength (λ
avg
), was found according
to the following equation.
,
λ
a
v
g
=
∑
λ
I
(
λ
)
∑
I
(
λ
)
where λ is the emission wavelength and
I­(λ) represents fluorescence. This was performed over a wavelength
range that extensively covered the emission maxima. Wavelength shifts
were also calculated using the center of spectral mass values.
The limit of detection (LOD) was defined as the lowest concentration
that had a fluorescence greater than or equal to the average fluorescence
of the blank sample (8 M urea/50 mM AmBic) plus three standard deviations
of the blank.
The lower limit of quantification
(LLOQ) was calculated as the lowest amount of tryptophan measurable
within an acceptable precision,
which
was determined to be within 10% of the theoretical value using the
calibration curve.
Unless otherwise
specified, samples were diluted 1:10 with 8 M
urea/50 mM AmBic immediately prior to measurement to ensure the proteins/peptides
were in similar denaturing conditions.
To obtain protein or peptide concentrations for samples, the experimentally
derived tryptophan concentrations were subjected to a conversion factor
based on the actual (162.64 for mature BSA) or average (85.47 for
TYK-nu cells)
tryptophan residue content.
TYK-nu Lysate Preparation
TYK-nu cells were grown in
minimal essential medium with 20 mM glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum,
and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. The cells were maintained in
a humidified incubator at 37 °C in a 5% CO
2
atmosphere.
For cell harvesting, medium was removed and the adherent cells washed
with PBS. After discarding the PBS, fresh medium with trypsin–EDTA
was added to the cells for 2 min at 37 °C. Supplementary fresh
medium was added, and the resulting cell suspension was transferred
to a 15 mL tube before centrifugation at 300 g for 5 min at 20 °C.
After supernatant removal, the cell pellet was washed with PBS and
stored at −80 °C.
When required, the cell pellet
was lysed with 4% SDS supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail,
followed by DNA shearing with a 26 G needle and incubation for 1 h
at room temperature. Protein precipitation was performed overnight
with acetone (four volume equivalents) at −20 °C and a
protein pellet obtained by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at
−9 °C. The supernatant was removed and after two washes
in ice-cold acetone and sample centrifugation, the pellet was air-dried
on ice for 10 min prior to resuspension in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic.
In-Solution Digestion Protocol
BSA (200 μg) in
8 M urea/50 mM AmBic or 6 M guanidine hydrochloride/50 mM Tris–HCl
was reduced with 10 mM DTT or TCEP at room temperature for 60 min
(shaking at 500 rpm). Samples were then alkylated with 15 mM IAM or
CA and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. When
IAM was used as the alkylation agent, an additional quenching step
with 10 mM reducing agent was performed at room temperature for 15
min with agitation at 500 rpm. Afterward, samples were diluted with
50 mM AmBic to lower the urea concentration to 0.8 M. Trypsin/Lys-C
mix was added to each sample at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 and
incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 500 rpm for 18 h. The samples
were then acidified with formic acid to obtain a 1% final concentration.
Aliquots (10 μL from an initial 1000 μL) were collected
after each step of the in-solution protocol and measured by tryptophan
fluorescence to determine protein or peptide content.
C18 Peptide Cleanup
Digested samples were desalted
using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) in a vacuum
manifold. For all steps, 1 mL solvent volumes were added and the cartridge
flow rate performed at one drop per second. The cartridge was activated
with methanol before three washes with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic
acid. The sorbent was equilibrated three times with 0.1% formic acid.
After the sample was loaded, the resulting flow-through was reloaded
onto the sorbent. The cartridge was washed three times with 0.1% formic
acid and elution performed with 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.
Samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1%
formic acid.
Surfactant Compatibility Experiments
BSA (200 μg)
or TYK-nu cell lysate (60 μg) in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic was diluted
with 8% SDS or 4% SDC (in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic) to obtain maximum
surfactant concentrations of 4% SDS or 2% SDC, respectively. Samples
were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 60 min. Alkylation
was performed with 15 mM CA and the mixture incubated at room temperature
in the dark for 30 min. Aliquots (10 μL) were taken after each
step and the protein content quantified by tryptophan fluorescence.
Protein Determination Experiments for Calculation of Conversion
Factors
BSA (10 mg) and soy flour (50 mg) were solubilized
separately in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic and 2% DTT. The denatured samples
were briefly vortexed before centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min.
Supernatant aliquots were diluted 1:20 or 1:40 in water for colorimetric
protein concentration measurements, with the Bradford assay conducted
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Based on these results,
fresh supernatants containing 80 μg protein were diluted with
8 M urea/50 mM AmBic to obtain 1 and 2 μg/μL protein concentrations
for tryptophan fluorescence assay measurements. Experimentally derived
conversion factors were calculated by dividing the obtained Bradford
assay protein concentration by the observed tryptophan concentration.
Results and Discussion
Tryptophan Fluorescence Assay Sensitivity
The fluorescence
assay displayed linearity over three orders of magnitude for tryptophan
(0.005713 to 11.7 ng/μL) (Supporting Information,
Figure S1A
), with a 0.00257 ng/μL LOD and
0.0114 ng/μL LLOQ. The instrumentation sensitivity compares
favorably to the 0.05 ng/μL LLOQ obtained in 96-well plates
for tryptophan measurements,
although
the sample throughput is lower. After taking into account the 1:10
sample dilution and average mammalian conversion factor,
the LOD and LLOQ for human protein concentrations
were established at 2.2 and 9.74 ng/μL, respectively.
There were concerns that fluorescence sensitivity might also be affected
by differences in urea concentration. In a typical in-solution digestion
workflow (
Figure
),
sample aliquots collected from the latter stages will contain less
urea than those collected before sample dilution. To this end, BSA
aliquots obtained from the first and last steps of the digestion protocol
were mixed 1 in 10 with 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic to ensure the urea concentration
during fluorescence measurements was 8 and 7.28 M, respectively. The
resulting emission profiles were very similar (Supporting Information,
Figure S2
), suggesting the additional 8 M urea/50
mM AmBic provides a similar denaturing microenvironment for both samples.
Moreover, any fluorescence readings for measuring the protein or peptide
content from samples will largely be unaffected by their initial urea
content.
1
In-solution digestion protocol. Aliquots for protein/peptide determination
were assessed by tryptophan fluorescence after the following sample
preparation steps: (A) protein solubilization, (B) disulfide bond
reduction, (C) sulfhydryl alkylation, (D) sample dilution for lower
urea concentration, (E) protein digestion, and (F) termination of
protein digestion by acidification.
Protein and Peptide Measurements during the In-Solution Digestion
Protocol Using the Tryptophan Fluorescence Assay
After optimization
of the tryptophan fluorescence assay, 200 μg BSA was processed
following the in-solution digestion protocol (
Figure
), with aliquots collected from each stage
quantified by tryptophan fluorescence. There were two steps in the
protocol that led to an unexpected set of observations, namely, the
reduction and sample dilution steps (
Figure
A). Although these results could be initially
perceived as protein losses, we decided to investigate the underlying
causes for these results on an individual basis.
2
(A) BSA recovery measurements
during the in-solution digestion
protocol, with percentages expressed relative to the reduction step
(
n
= 5). (B) Percentage recovery of 200 μg
BSA (purple,
n
= 5), 200 μg BSA no reduction/alkylation
control (yellow,
n
= 5), and 200 μg equivalent
tryptophan standard (green,
n
= 5). (C) Normalized
emission spectra obtained at different stages of the in-solution digestion
protocol for BSA. (a) Tryptophan (0.0117 μg/μL) standard,
(b) solubilization in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic, (c) reduction with DTT,
(d) alkylation with IAM, (e) dilution to 0.8 M urea, and (f) digestion
with Trypsin/Lys-C for 6 h. (d) and (e) were measured at 800 V, while
the rest were measured at 560 V. The dotted lines and circles represent
λ
avg
values.
Effect of Solubilization and Reduction on BSA Protein Determinations
Compared to the initial solubilization of the sample, 13% was adjudged
to be missing after DTT addition (
Figure
A). However, the use of the alternative reducing
agent TCEP provided no benefit (Supporting Information,
Figure S3
), indicating this outcome was not caused
by a specific reducing agent. Moreover, no protein loss was reported
when the reducing agent was replaced with 50 mM AmBic (
Figure
B), demonstrating the reduction
process was the causative factor. The sensitivity of the fluorescence
assay was not affected, as both DTT (
Figure
B) and TCEP (Supporting Information,
Figure S3
) did not alter the emission intensity
of the tryptophan standard, consistent with a previous study reporting
the compatibility of DTT with the assay.
We therefore pursued potential explanations from a protein
denaturation perspective. A plausible reason for the lower protein
signal was incomplete protein denaturation, given the sensitivity
of tryptophan fluorescence to the polarity of its microenvironment.
It has been reported that BSA undergoes
a two-step denaturation
process, where it is only partially denatured in 8 M urea
or 0.2% SDS.
In
order to promote further unfolding, protein reduction (17 disulfide
bonds are present in BSA
) or increased
denaturant power would be required. We therefore examined the tryptophan
emission profiles for BSA samples before and after reduction. Compared
to the tryptophan standard (λ
avg
= 364 nm,
Figure
C, (a)), BSA solubilized
in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic resulted in λ
avg
= 351 nm
(
Figure
C, (b)), a
13 nm decrease (blueshift) from the tryptophan standard. This crucially
indicates the tryptophan residues of BSA were in a more non-polar
microenvironment and complete protein unfolding had not occurred.
In contrast, the reduced BSA sample reported
a λ
avg
= 358 nm (
Figure
C, (c)), a 7 nm increase (redshift) from
the earlier non-reduced
sample. The emission profiles of samples taken from successive steps
in the in-solution digestion protocol (
Figure
C, (d–f)) showed no further λ
avg
changes, indicating that complete denaturation of BSA had
already occurred after the combination of urea solubilization and
disulfide bond cleavage. Not only do these results support the requirement
for a two-step denaturation process for complete BSA unfolding,
,
but also that the tryptophan fluorescence assay must be conducted
with suitably unfolded proteins for accurate protein determinations.
When 6 M guanidine hydrochloride
,
was used to
denature BSA, the λ
avg
decreased by only 4 nm (Supporting
Information,
Figure S4, (b)
), compared
to the tryptophan control (Supporting Information,
Figure S4, (a)
), with similar λ
avg
values
measured for downstream processed samples (Supporting Information,
Figure S4, (c–e)
). These results indicate
that 6 M guanidine hydrochloride was more effective than 8 M urea
in denaturing BSA, an outcome consistent with an earlier report.
However, a similar 10% decrease in emission
intensity was observed upon reduction (Supporting Information,
Figure S5
), mirroring the previous result obtained
with BSA solubilized in 8 M urea.
Based on our exhaustive measurements,
the BSA loss putatively associated
with the reduction step was incorrect. Moreover, this discrepancy
was instead the consequence of an overestimated BSA concentration
that arose from incomplete protein unfolding, which was ultimately
rectified by protein reduction. Therefore, tryptophan fluorescence
measurements are accurate only when a denaturing environment that
facilitates sufficient protein unfolding has been established. In
the specific case of BSA denaturation by 8 M urea, tryptophan readings
should only be performed after the reduction procedure.
This additional stipulation should also minimize
the influence of any remaining disulfide bonds on protein folding
in complex samples.
Effect of Alkylation on BSA Protein Determinations
Protein alkylation did not cause any notable effects, with IAM incubation
causing only negligible alterations in protein amount (
Figure
A) and no change in λ
avg
(
Figure
C, (d)). When CA was the alkylating agent, the outcomes were also
similar (Supporting Information,
Figures S3 and S6, (f)
). Likewise, the optional DTT quenching step, often
used to decrease side reactions from unreacted IAM,
,
had no discernible effect (Supporting Information,
Figures S4, (e) and S5
). These observations suggest that the
denaturing conditions established after the initial reduction step
were still present after protein alkylation.
Effect of Sample Dilution on BSA Protein Determinations
After sample dilution was performed to minimize the inhibitive effects
of urea on trypsin activity,
tryptophan
fluorescence measurements reported a marked decrease in BSA protein.
Approximately half of the protein content was unaccountable compared
to the amount measured at the reduction step (
Figure
A). Despite the appearance of a peak shoulder
in the diluted sample, no apparent shift in λ
avg
occurred
(
Figure
C, (e)), suggesting
that the protein material was still largely unfolded. The impact of
dilution was less severe on the BSA sample processed without reduction
and alkylation, but a decrease in the vicinity of one-third of the
initially solubilized protein was still observed (
Figure
B). It is known that disulfide
bonds can affect protein stability
and
our results suggest the no reduction/alkylation BSA control was more
stable after dilution from the presence of disulfide bonds. In contrast,
the tryptophan standard exhibited no appreciable alterations in abundance
when similarly diluted.
We therefore investigated possible hypotheses
for the lower protein reading incurred by dilution. Subsequent experiments
using 50 mM Tris–HCl as the diluent (Supporting Information,
Figure S7
) resulted in similar protein recovery
outcomes compared to 50 mM AmBic (
Figure
A), denoting this effect was not diluent
specific.
3
(A) Recovery of BSA after dilution to different urea concentrations
(8 to 0.8 M) using 50 mM AmBic (
n
= 5). (B) Recovery
of BSA after dilution with 8 M urea to achieve equivalent urea concentrations
between 8 and 0.8 M (
n
= 5). Protein amounts were
measured relative to the amount after reduction/alkylation.
Despite the severity increasing with lower final
urea concentrations,
no appreciable alterations in the amount of recoverable BSA was observed
when 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic was the diluent (
Figure
B), indicating that the final volume was
not a major factor. This highlights the final urea concentration as
the crucial determinant responsible for the decreased amount of available
protein after dilution, with the lower urea concentration potentially
providing more suitable conditions for protein insolubility to occur
through aggregation and precipitation processes.
Effect of Digestion Conditions, Acidification, and C18 Cleanup
on BSA Peptide Determinations
In stark contrast, nearly 20%
of the BSA amount was restored and amenable to tryptophan fluorescence
assay measurement after only 2 h of Trypsin/Lys-C digestion (
Figure
A). It was possible
that the increased fluorescence originated from the amount of enzyme
added, but the measurement taken directly after enzyme addition (0
h) does not support this explanation. We therefore hypothesized that
the protein content becomes progressively soluble from enzymatic digestion
and/or the elevated temperature conditions, which is occurring simultaneously
with the liberation of peptides. It should be noted that a shift in
λ
avg
was not observed during digestion (
Figure
C, (f)), indicating
that the degree of solvent exposure for the tryptophans present remained
unchanged. Next, acidification of the BSA peptide mixture with formic
acid did not cause any quantitative alterations (
Figure
A), but concomitantly demonstrated
the buffering capacity of the tryptophan fluorescence assay.
Finally, we also assessed the Sep-Pak procedure for peptide losses
(Supporting Information,
Figure S8
). As
expected, high peptide recoveries were obtained (greater than 90%),
with supplementary loading, washing, and elution steps found to be
largely unnecessary.
In summary, the capability to perform proteinaceous
measurements
throughout the entire sample preparation protocol demonstrates the
wide applicability of the tryptophan fluorescence assay. It allows
elucidation of the protocol step(s) responsible for unexpected or
large decreases in protein or peptide content, which is invaluable
for scenarios where sample preparation troubleshooting or method optimization
is required.
Surfactant Suitability for BSA Quantification by the Tryptophan
Fluorescence Assay
Because of the large variety of surfactants
used in proteomics, we also examined if they had any detrimental effect
on the tryptophan fluorescence assay to measure protein amounts. Although
an earlier study reported their general compatibility with this assay,
surfactants can cause λ
avg
decreases
(blueshifts) and alterations in the fluorescence intensity of proteins.
If these phenomena extensively occur, accurate
protein quantification by tryptophan fluorescence may not be possible.
To this end, BSA solubilized in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic was incubated
with the commonly used surfactants SDS (up to 4%) or SDC (up to 2%).
Tryptophan fluorescence determinations were then performed to investigate
possible changes in the emission profiles and fluorescence intensities.
Compared to BSA solubilized in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic (
Figure
A, (b)), 2 and 4% SDS resulted
in a 14 nm decrease in λ
avg
(
Figure
A, (c) and (d), respectively), while smaller
decreases (6 and 11 nm) were observed with 1 (
Figure
A, (e)) and 2% SDC (
Figure
A, (f)), respectively. These blueshifts indicate
the presence of a more hydrophobic environment for tryptophan residues,
consistent with protein–surfactant binding.
,
Most notably, blueshifts are usually associated with increases in
fluorescence intensity.
,
This was the case for
the SDC samples, where approximately 15% increases in emission intensities
were measured compared to the 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic control (
Figure
B). However, both
SDS concentrations conversely reported emission decreases close to
20%. These observations may result from the fluorescent quenching
of tryptophan, which can occur from its interactions with polar solvent
molecules.
Furthermore, it is likely
that the tryptophans have greater solvent exposure from the extensive
unfolding of BSA caused by SDS. This was consistent with observations
where free tryptophan in the presence of these surfactants did not
cause any alterations in emission profiles (Supporting Information,
Figure S9
) and intensities (Supporting Information,
Table S1
).
4
(A) Normalized emission spectra obtained
for BSA (100 μg)
in 50 mM AmBic with (b) 8 M urea, (c) 2% SDS and 8 M urea, (d) 4%
SDS and 8 M urea, (e) 1% SDC and 8 M urea, (f) 2% SDC and 8 M urea.
(a) Tryptophan (0.0117 μg/μL) standard in 8 M urea/50
mM AmBic. All measurements obtained at 560 V. The dotted lines and
circles represent λ
avg
values. (B) Emission of BSA
(100 μg) (
n
= 5) in the presence of 8 M urea,
SDS (2 and 4%) and 8 M urea, and SDC (1 and 2%) and 8 M urea pre-
and post-reduction with DTT.
Combined Effect of Surfactant Choice and Protein Reduction for
BSA Quantification by the Tryptophan Fluorescence Assay
In
contrast to our earlier BSA observations involving urea, similar emission
intensities were obtained for both SDS concentrations measured before
and after reduction (
Figure
B), indicating reduction had no effect on the amount of denatured
BSA. Since SDS is a more effective denaturant than 8 M urea,
,
it is not surprising that both 2 and 4% SDS facilitated the complete
denaturation of BSA. As previously reported,
we also observed similar blueshifts for SDS concentrations as low
as 0.1% (Supporting Information,
Figure S10
).
However, the lower concentrations exhibited different effects
on the emission intensities, with 0.1 and 0.2% SDS generating slightly
higher intensities than 8 M urea (Supporting Information,
Figure S11
). This suggests that at these low
SDS concentrations, BSA exists in a more folded state. It is known
that at monomer equilibrium concentrations above 0.15%, approximately
1.4 g SDS can bind to a gram of protein,
such that 0.1% SDS would be insufficient for consistent saturation.
Our results are also in agreement with a report stating that small
amounts of SDS can actually preserve the native structure of BSA by
providing protection against denaturation.
However, at 0.5% SDS and higher percentages, all the emission intensities
drop below the 8 M urea control. A plateau was reached at 1% SDS,
which is consistent with a study finding this concentration sufficient
for complete BSA denaturation.
In contrast,
SDC does not denature BSA,
but rather
binds to specific sites in the native state. Because of the higher
intensities observed with SDC, it infers this surfactant promoted
protein refolding to a limited extent.
The Importance of Denaturing Conditions for Accurate Protein
Quantification
While protein unfolding is typically associated
with redshifts,
blueshifts were observed
for BSA in the presence of SDS (
Figure
A, (c) and (d)) and SDC (
Figure
A, (e) and (f)). Blueshifts can also occur
when negative charges from neighboring residues are in close proximity
to the benzene ring of tryptophan,
such
that the negatively charged polar head group of SDS may have additional
consequences when bound to protein. In the situations where SDS and
SDC were used, we were concerned that spectral shifts might not be
reliable for ascertaining the denaturation status of proteins.
We therefore investigated the effect of DTT reduction on the emission
profiles and intensities of BSA in the presence of SDS and SDC. As
BSA was already shown to be denatured at 2 and 4% SDS, no λ
avg
changes were introduced by reduction (Supporting Information,
Figure S12A, (c)
) and (Supporting Information,
Figure S12B, (c)
), respectively. Similar outcomes
were also obtained for SDS concentrations down to 0.2% (Supporting
Information,
Figure S13A, (c)
, Supporting
Information,
Figure S13B, (c)
and Supporting
Information,
Figure S13C, (c)
), but a 17
nm redshift was reported for 0.1% SDS after reduction (Supporting
Information,
Figure S13D, (c)
), consistent
with DTT inducing further protein unfolding from an insufficiently
denatured BSA sample. Importantly, for samples solubilized in SDS
up to 0.5%, DTT reduction not only decreased their emission intensities
to avoid an overestimated protein measurement, but also crucially
corrected it to the expected protein concentration (Supporting Information,
Figure S14
).
Although 1 and 2% SDC caused
19 and 24 nm blueshifts for solubilized
BSA (Supporting Information,
Figure S15A
, (b)
and Supporting Information,
Figure S15B, (b)
, respectively), subsequent reduction
resulted in 13 and 17 nm λ
avg
redshifts, respectively
(Supporting Information,
Figure S15A
, (c)
and Supporting Information,
Figure S15B, (c)
, respectively). This indicates
that SDC binds less strongly to BSA in its unfolded state, which is
consistent with the higher affinity of SDC for the native form.
As previously observed for reduced BSA in SDS
concentrations from 0.1 to 0.5% (Supporting Information,
Figure S14
), the emission intensities obtained
at both SDC concentrations after reduction (
Figure
B) were not only considerably lower, but
also at the expected protein level. Without reduction, the magnitude
of protein overestimation for these two SDC samples would be approximately
40%, which is a situation to be avoided during any proteomic experiment.
These results indicate that reduction in the SDC samples causes additional
BSA unfolding and subsequently increases the accuracy of the tryptophan
fluorescence assay to quantify protein.
In summary, sufficient
protein denaturation is required if tryptophan
fluorescence measurements are to be effectively and robustly used
for protein quantification. When the surfactant already provides adequate
denaturing power, as demonstrated by 1% SDS and higher percentages
for BSA, additional protein reduction is not necessary. However, when
1 and 2% SDC was found to be insufficient for denaturation, protein
reduction resulted in consistently accurate emission values for BSA,
thus preventing any potential protein overestimations. In order to
ensure accurate protein quantification of many different sample types,
we recommend the combination of protein denaturation and reduction
be performed before undertaking tryptophan fluorescence readings.
Our results reveal redshifts were only detected in a few denatured
and reduced BSA samples that also contained surfactants, indicating
that these spectral shifts alone were unreliable for determining their
denaturation status.
Effect of Surfactant on Protein Determination of a Complex Cell
Lysate by the Tryptophan Fluorescence Assay
Although the
proteinaceous content from in-solution digested BSA samples could
be accurately determined by tryptophan fluorescence, proteomic samples
can contain many thousands of proteins, with their abundances spanning
a large dynamic range. For example, the dynamic range for the cellular
proteome is close to seven orders of magnitude.
We therefore investigated whether the denaturation conditions
used in the BSA studies were still appropriate for the protein quantification
of complex samples.
The TYK-nu protein pellet was resuspended
in 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic and solubilized with SDS (up to 4%) or SDC
(up to 2%). Compared to the 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic control (λ
avg
= 352 nm, Supporting Information,
Figure S16, (b)
), the emission profiles showed only a very small blueshift
(approximately 2 nm) for 2 and 4% SDS (Supporting Information,
Figure S16, (c) and (d)
, respectively), with
no spectral shift observed from 1 and 2% SDC incubation (Supporting
Information,
Figure S16, (e) and (f)
, respectively).
Surprisingly, the λ
avg
obtained from the 8 M urea/50
mM AmBic control was lower than expected, suggesting that sufficient
protein denaturation had not occurred. However, we cannot rule out
the possibility of remnant SDS from the initial cell lysis contributing
to this reading, since blueshifting occurred with 0.1% SDS in an earlier
BSA experiment (cf. Supporting Information,
Figure S10
).
Initial examination of the TYK-nu protein emission
intensity changes
revealed similarities with those observed for BSA in the presence
of surfactants, albeit on a smaller scale. An increase in emission
intensity (approximately 7%) was reported for 1 and 2% SDC when compared
to the 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic control (
Figure
), which is consistent with the ability of
SDC to better stabilize the native state.
For 2 and 4% SDS, there were 15% decreases in fluorescence, with
fluorescent quenching a likely contributor to these results.
5
Emission of
60 μg TYK-nu lysate (
n
= 4)
in the presence of 8 M urea, 8 M urea and SDS (2 and 4%), and 8 M
urea and SDC (1 and 2%) before (purple bars) and after (teal bars)
reduction with DTT.
Combined Effect of Surfactant Choice and Protein Reduction on
the Protein Determination of a Complex Cell Lysate by the Tryptophan
Fluorescence Assay
Intriguingly, there was no obvious effect
of protein reduction on the TYK-nu samples, with only minor changes
detected in the emission intensities (
Figure
).
While this outcome was expected
for TYK-nu samples containing SDS and DTT, the absence of any reduction-induced
intensity changes in the SDC solubilized samples warranted further
investigation. Emission profiles obtained for TYK-nu samples solubilized
with either 8 M urea (Supporting Information,
Figure S17, (b)
), or 1 and 2% SDC (Supporting Information,
Figures S18A, (b) and S18B, (b)
, respectively),
or 2 and 4% SDS (Supporting Information,
Figures S19A, (b) and S19B, (b)
, respectively), revealed no redshifts
after the addition of 10 mM DTT (Supporting Information,
Figures S17, (c), S18A, (c), S18B, (c), S19A
,
(c), and
S19B, (c)
, respectively). The
negligible effect of reduction was most likely due to the vast majority
of proteins in the complex lysate possessing a lower number of disulfide
bonds. For context, it has been reported that the median number of
disulfide bonds in human proteins is two,
which is considerably lower than the 17 disulfide bonds in BSA.
Nonetheless, we still recommend that the reduction
step be performed before protein determination measurements utilizing
tryptophan fluorescence are conducted, as any potential influence
of disulfide bonds will be mitigated for most proteins.
In summary,
we observed inadequate TYK-nu protein denaturation
from 8 M urea or SDC (1 or 2%) usage, with no improvement provided
by an additional reducing agent. If these samples were subjected to
tryptophan fluorescence to determine protein content, protein overestimations
in the vicinity of 15% (8 M urea/50 mM AmBic) and up to 20% (1 and
2% SDC) would result. However, sufficient TYK-nu protein unfolding
occurred with the use of 2 or 4% SDS, with no further impact on protein
quantification accuracy. Because these SDS concentrations can affect
trypsin digestion efficiency,
we did
not investigate the subsequent steps where potential losses might
be incurred during an in-solution digestion of TYK-nu lysate.
We hypothesized whether accurate protein quantification could still
be achieved for incompletely denatured samples by adding SDS prior
to fluorescence measurement. This was assessed by diluting 8 M urea
TYK-nu sample aliquots 1:10 with 4% SDS/8 M urea/50 mM AmBic (Supporting
Information,
Figure S20
, red line) or the
standard 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic (Supporting Information,
Figure S20
, black line). While both calibration
curves constructed from serially diluted TYK-nu samples displayed
good linearity (R
2
> 0.99), the emission intensities
from
the 8 M urea/50 mM AmBic samples were generally higher from insufficient
protein unfolding. However, these undesirable protein overestimations
were mitigated by the extra denaturation capability provided by SDS.
When accurate protein quantification is required, this SDS spiking
strategy can be applied to poorly denatured samples. We hypothesize
that this strategy can be applied to peptide samples where insufficient
denaturation is suspected.
Calculation of Conversion Factors Based on Accurate Protein
Colorimetric and Tryptophan Fluorescence Assays
Amino acid
analysis is considered the gold standard for protein quantification,
which typically involves hydrolysis of the protein sample in acidic
conditions before chromatographic separation and detection of the
individual amino acids.
However, the
sample preparation protocol is extensive and requires specialized
equipment to perform the analysis. As demonstrated in an earlier study,
data from colorimetric protein assays and tryptophan
fluorescence measurements can be combined to calculate a conversion
factor, provided they originate from the same sample type and the
samples are depleted of non-proteinaceous material. The establishment
of a sample-specific conversion factor allows protein concentrations
to be determined solely from tryptophan fluorescence data, potentially
circumventing the need for conducting amino acid analysis. We performed
both colorimetric and fluorescence assays for denatured BSA and a
soy flour standard, obtaining conversion factors of 169.67 (
n
= 2) and 118.33 (
n
= 6), respectively.
These values were within 5% of the expected conversion factors for
theoretical BSA (162.64) and from the amino acid analysis of soy flour
(116.32). We also observed the negligible (but consistent) overestimation
of protein content by the colorimetric assay relative to the tryptophan
fluorescence assay as previously described,
but the overall impact on accurate protein quantification was minimal.
Although we successfully obtained accurate conversion factors,
their calculation inherently relies on both the colorimetric protein
assay data and tryptophan fluorescence measurements genuinely representing
the sample content; otherwise, incorrect conversion factors will result.
For unknown samples, this may require investigations into ensuring
the total protein complement is effectively extracted and minimizing
the presence of non-proteinaceous compounds, while the protein content
needs to be sufficiently denatured for accurate tryptophan fluorescence
measurements. If any of these requirements cannot be adequately met,
it might be prudent for problematic samples to undergo amino acid
analysis to assist recalculation of the conversion factors.
Conclusions
The tryptophan fluorescence assay is an
attractive proposition
for proteomic laboratories as it is capable of accurately measuring
protein and peptide content without interference from many sample
reagents. Since tryptophan fluorescence measurements are sensitive
to the local environment, it is reasonable to postulate that inappropriate
protein denaturation conditions might provide incorrect measurements.
This study provides relevant guidance for commonly used solubilization
agents and sample types in order to achieve complete protein denaturation
and accurate protein measurements. We have also demonstrated the capabilities
of the tryptophan fluorescence assay for other proteomic purposes.
For inadequately denatured samples, correct protein measurements can
still be obtained when protein aliquots set aside for protein determination
were spiked with 4% SDS. In turn, this strategy also provides valuable
feedback regarding the suitability of the initial sample preparation
conditions and whether optimization is warranted. The ability to perform
protein and peptide measurements throughout an entire sample preparation
workflow with one assay is particularly useful for troubleshooting
unexpected sample losses. We anticipate that the tryptophan fluorescence
assay will be used for numerous applications in proteomic laboratories.
Supplementary Material