Introduction
Microvascular injury is a hallmark of
late radiation damage across
various organs depending on the radiation field. It is believed to
promote radiation-induced renal dysfunction, skin fibrosis and heart
failure.
−
One area where the effects of radiation on normal tissue are particularly
apparent is injury after treatment of brain tumors.
−
In fact, up
to 90% of patients experience cognitive function decline within three
to six months after radiation.
−
Vascular damage, neuroinflammation and neuronal injury have been
proposed as mechanisms driving cognitive decline.
Microvascular injury can compromise the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) breakdown, leading to inflammatory cell infiltration and inflammation.
It can also result in apoptosis and senescence
in vascular wall cells, potentially causing vascular rarefaction,
reduced perfusion, and ischemia.
While
there is consensus on a role of microvascular injury, the exact mechanisms
and extent of microvascular injury’s role in cognitive decline
remains poorly understood. Previous studies have used proteomic approaches
to characterize the effect of radiation exposure on mouse whole brain
proteome,
hippocampal proteome,
vascular endothelial membrane proteome,
and microglial signaling pathways.
However, to date, no study has investigated
the long-term impact of radiation on the brain microvasculature using
label free quantitative proteomics approach. Such analysis is critical
to understand radiation-induced microvascular injury and its role
in cognitive decline.
To address this gap, we aimed to uncover
changes in the microvascular
proteome 6 months after RT. We chose to conduct our study using 12-month-old
mice, approximately equivalent to 60-year-old humans, which is close
to the reported median age of patients treated with RT for brain tumors.
Of note, there is age-dependent variation in
brain radiation injury, with the highest pathology occurring in the
very young and elderly.
,
We opted for a six-month
follow-up to focus on chronic changes from radiation injury. Previous
work, including our own, has suggested that various pathways, such
as mitochondrial injury, altered vascular transport, and changes in
cell adhesion and tight junctions, may play a role in the long term
effects of radiation.
−
To gain an unbiased view on long-term effects of radiation exposure
on the cerebral microvessel proteome, we conducted bioinformatics
analyses using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and iPathwayGuide
to identify significantly affected canonical pathways that may contribute
to cerebral microvasculature dysfunction. Additionally, we performed
immunoblotting to validate our proteomics findings and bioinformatics
results.
Materials and Methods
Animals Housing and Irradiation Procedure
One-year-old
male C57BL/6J mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory. The
mice were randomly assigned to the treatment (RT) or the control group,
each with five animals. They were housed in temperature-controlled
rooms with a 12-h light/dark cycle, provided standard rodent chow,
and had water access
ad libitum
. To avoid gender-related
confounding factors, only male mice were used. The control group mice
(n = 5) underwent sham irradiation, anesthetized with ketamine and
xylazine, placed in the radiation chamber without exposure. Mice were
randomly selected for irradiation versus sham treatment. The irradiated
group (n = 5) received a 12 Gy X-ray dose to the whole brain using
the XStrahl Small Animal Radiation Research Platform, which uses a
60 kVp beam of 0.2 mm Al quality for Cone Beam CT and a 220 kVp 0.63
mm Cu quality beam for treatment. The 12 Gy dose corresponds to 2
Gy fractions of a 40 Gy total, commonly used for RT in patients with
five or more brain metastasis. Both groups were euthanized six months
postirradiation for analysis. No mice were excluded from the analysis.
All experimental procedures were carried out by following Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Iowa and the Iowa
City VA Health Care System. This study was conducted in accordance
with the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0 for reporting animal research to ensure
transparency, rigor and reproducibility.
Isolation of Cerebral Microvessels and Preparation of Protein
Samples
Mice were euthanized using 100% CO2 inhalation, followed
by cervical dislocation. Brains from both control and irradiated groups
were surgically removed, rinsed with cold Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered
saline (DPBS) (Gibco #2430024), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and
stored at – 80 °C. Cerebral microvessels were isolated
following Lee et al.
Briefly, brain tissue
was homogenized with a loose-fit Dounce grinder (Sigma-Aldrich #D9063)
in MCDB 131 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific #10372019) and centrifuged
at 2,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in
a 15% (wt./vol) 70-kDa dextran solution (Sigma-Aldrich #31390) and
centrifuged at 7,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The top layer containing
myelin and parenchymal cells was discarded. Microvessels were collected
using a 40-μm cell strainer (Corning #352340), rinsed with cold
DPBS, and transferred into MCDB 131 medium containing 0.5% (wt./vol)
BSA (Millipore Sigma #126609). The suspension was centrifuged at 16,100
g for 30 min at 4 °C to pellet the microvessels. Pellets were
stored at – 80 °C for analysis.
For protein extraction,
the isolated microvessel pellets were mixed with 130 μL of RIPA
buffer (Fisher Scientific #R0278) containing protease (Pierce #A32963)
and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Pierce #A32957). The mixture
was vortexed three times for 30 s each (Fisher Scientific #0215370),
then agitated for 30 min at 15–20 °C. Samples were vortexed
again and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. To further break down the
tissue, the samples were lysed using a Covaris E220 focused ultrasonicator
(Covaris #500239) with following parameters. The instrument parameters
for shearing were as follows: water level set point 10, water temperature
6 °C, peak incident power 175 W, duty factor 10%, cycles per
burst 200, and duration 300 s. Homogenized lysates were transferred
to Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 16,100 g (Eppendorf #5415R)
for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and stored at – 80
°C. Total protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein
assay kit (Pierce #23225). Finally, 30 μg of protein from each
sample was used for quantitative proteomics analysis. Samples were
labeled with a numeric identifier that did not include information
about irradiation or sham treatment and sent for proteomic analysis.
Protein Digestion
Protein digestion was performed using
the SP3 method.
For each sample, 30 μg
of protein in 150 μL of lysis buffer was incubated with 10 μL
of SP3 beads (a 1:1 mixture of Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B, Thermo
Scientific). Pure acetonitrile (ACN, VWR Chemicals) was added to a
final concentration of 70% (v/v). The samples were incubated mixed
at 800 rpm for 18 min, then placed on a magnet rack for 3 min to immobilize
the SP3 beads. The supernatant was discarded, and the SP3 beads were
washed three times with 1 mL of 80% ethanol/water (v/v) and once with
800 μL of ACN. Bound proteins were reduced with 100 μL
of 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate
(Sigma), pH 8.0, and incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 800 rpm
for 1 h. Proteins were then alkylated with 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide
(CAA, Sigma) for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. Finally, 1 μg
of trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added to each sample, and they
were incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking at 800 rpm. Digests
were acidified with formic acid (FA, Carlo Erba) to a final concentration
of 1% (v/v), dried in vacuo, and stored at – 80 °C until
use.
Automated Offline Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis
Peptides were resuspended in 110 μL of buffer A (25 mM ammonium
formate, pH 10) and subjected to high pH reverse-phase fractionation
using the AssayMAP Bravo platform and 5 mL RP-S cartridges (Agilent).
Cartridges were primed with 150 μL each of isopropanol, acetonitrile
(ACN), and buffer B (80% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) at
a 50 μL/min flow rate. They were then equilibrated with 100
μL of buffer A, and peptides were loaded at 5 μL/min,
collecting the flow-through (FT). Peptides were eluted with 25 mM
ammonium formate, pH 10, using increasing ACN concentrations (5%,
10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 80%). The seven fractions were pooled into
four final fractions, dried in vacuo, and stored at – 80 °C.
Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+
system coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Peptides were first delivered to a trap column (75 μm
i.d. × 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil C18 beads)
and washed with 0.1% formic acid (FA) at 5 μL/min for 10 min,
then transferred to an analytical column (75 μm i.d. ×
45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil C18 beads) at 300
nL/min. Chromatographic separation used a linear gradient of solvent
B (0.1% FA, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in ACN) and solvent A (0.1%
FA, 5% DMSO in water) over a 90 min total run time.
Full-scan
MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap from 360 to
1,300
m
/
z
at 60,000 resolutions,
with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 100% and a maximum
injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. The most intense precursors were
isolated with a 1.3
m
/
z
isolation
window for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.
Fragment ions were recorded in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolutions,
with a maxIT of 22 ms and an AGC target of 200%. Normalized collision
energy (NCE) was set to 25%. Charge state screening selected precursors
with charge states 2 to 6 for fragmentation, within a 2-s cycle time.
Dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s.
Identification and Quantitation of Peptides and Proteins
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant (version
2.2.0.0) with its built-in search engine, Andromeda.
Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database for
Mus musculus
(UP000000589, 55,338 entries, downloaded October
2022). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing up to two missed
cleavages. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a
fixed modification, and protein N-term acetylation and methionine
oxidation as variable modifications. Identifications were filtered
to achieve a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at protein and peptide
levels. The ″match between runs″ and ″second
peptide″ options were enabled. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ)
was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the
ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository
with the data set identifier PXD058732 (Web site:
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride
, Username: reviewer_pxd058732@ebi.ac.uk, Password: RJJaEf7seviy).
Proteomics Data Analysis and Pathway Enrichment Analysis
Protein identifications were filtered to exclude contaminants and
reverse (decoy) hits. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values
were log
2
-transformed and normalized by median centering
(
Table S1
)
. For downstream
analysis, only proteins quantified in all biological replicates were
retained
(n = 2,457,
Table S2
)
. Differential protein expression was assessed using
a Student’s
t
test with an S
0
parameter
of 0.1. To account for multiple testing, a permutation-based false
discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied, with a significance threshold
set at FDR < 0.05. This procedure is implemented in Perseus using
the Benjamini-Hochberg method, where statistically significant proteins
are flagged (+) rather than reporting explicit q-values. Proteins
identified by at least two unique peptides, with a fold change <0.77
or >1.30 and meeting the corrected p-value threshold, were considered
significantly differentially expressed (n = 414,
Table S3
)
−
and these proteins were used for downstream analysis.
Hierarchical cluster analysis of significantly dysregulated proteins
based on LFQ intensity values was performed using SR plot.
A volcano plot was generated using VolcaNoseR
web tool
including only proteins that
met the adjusted p-value (q-value) threshold. As numerical q-values
were not available from Perseus, the plot was created using unadjusted
p-values for the proteins identified as significant, to illustrate
differentially expressed proteins. To determine which proteins in
our data set are likely derived from specific vascular cell types
(endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytes), we compared the full
quantified proteomics data set (2,457 proteins) with a reference single-cell
transcriptomic atlas of the mouse brain vasculature, based on single-cell
RNA-seq gene expression data.
Enrichment
analysis of dysregulated proteins was conducted to assess their impact
on biological processes, cellular locations, molecular functions,
and KEGG pathways after radiation exposure, using HemI 2.0.
Canonical pathway, upstream regulator and disease
and biofunction analyses were performed with INGENUITY Pathway Analysis
(IPA) software,
applying a threshold
of – log (p-value) > 1.3. Pathways with a z-score >2.0
were
considered activated, while those with a z-score < – 2.0
were inhibited. Impact pathway analysis on differentially expressed
proteins was conducted using iPathwayGuide
with pathway annotations from the KEGG database and gene ontology
annotations from the Gene Ontology Consortium database. A threshold
of FDR-corrected p-value <0.05 was used to identify significantly
affected pathways.
Immunoblotting Analysis
Equal amounts of protein (5–10
μg) from control and irradiated groups were separated on NuPAGE
4% to 12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) and transferred to polyvinylidene
difluoride (PVDF) membranes using the Mini-PROTEAN 3 blotting system
(Bio-Rad). Membranes were stained with Ponceau S (Cell Signaling #59803S)
to confirm protein transfer, washed in TBS with Tween (TBST), and
blocked with 3% BSA (RPI Research #9048–46–8) or Starting
Block Blocking Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific #37538) for 2 h. Membranes
were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies, including
anti-NDUFB8 (Abcam, no. ab110413), anti-NDUFA11 (ABclonal, no. A16239),
anti-NDUFA4 (ABclonal, no. A15693), anti-SDHA (Cell Signaling, no.
11998), anti-SDHB (Abcam, no. ab110413), anti-UQCRC2 (Aviva systems
biology, no. OAAN01132), anti-MT-CO2 (ABclonal, no. A11154), anti-COX6B1
(ABclonal, no. A2228), anti-ATP5F1C (ABclonal, no. A15257), anti-ATP6VID
(ABclonal, no. A12940), anti-ATP5F1A (ABclonal, no. A11217), anti-ACLY
(ABclonal, no. A3719), anti-IDH3A (ABclonal, no. A14650), anti-DLD
(ABclonal, no. A13296), anti-ACO2 (ABclonal, no. A3716), anti-MDH2
(ABclonal, no. A13516), anti-ENO2 (Cell Signaling, no. 9536), anti-TPI
(ABclonal, no. A15733), anti-MPC1 (Cell Signaling, no.14462), and
anti-MPC2 (Cell Signaling, no. 46141). After washing, membranes were
incubated with secondary antibodies at a 1:5000 dilution for 2 h at
room temperature. After washing, membranes were developed using the
Cytiva Amersham ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent and scanned.
Ponceau S stained membrane was used as total protein loading control.
When necessary, membranes were stripped using Restore PLUS Western
Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific #46430) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions to remove bound antibodies,
and then reblocked and reprobed with a different primary antibody.
Immunoblot bands from five biological replicates in both control and
irradiated groups were analyzed and quantified using ImageJ software
(
http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/
).
Statistical Analysis
All experiments were conducted
in five biological replicates. Data were presented as mean with standard
deviation, and statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad
Prism 9.0 software. Normal distribution was evaluated using the D’Agostino-Pearson
omnibus normality test. Statistical significance for comparisons between
two groups was determined using the nonparametric Mann–Whitney
test. Differences were considered significant if p-values were <0.05.
Results
Proteome Profiling of Cerebral Microvessel after RT
To investigate the effects of radiation on cerebral microvasculature,
we performed quantitative proteomics using LC-MS/MS on samples from
male mice six months after RT with 12 Gy X-ray or sham treatment
(
Figure
A)
. The full workflow for this proteomics study is shown in
Figure
B. A total of 7,462
proteins were detected, and 2,457 were quantified
(see
Table S1, S2
)
. Label-free
quantitation (LFQ) demonstrated reproducibility among biological replicates
from both control and irradiated mice, as shown by Pearson correlation
(
Figure
C)
. Principal component analysis (PCA) using LFQ intensity
values of all identified proteins revealed a clear separation between
control and irradiated groups, indicating significant changes in protein
expression due to radiation
(
Figure
D)
.
1
Quantitative proteomics
analysis of the cerebral microvessels.
(A) Workflow for radiation therapy (RT) and sample collection. (B)
Workflow for high-throughput identification and quantification of
proteins from cerebral microvessels in control and irradiated mice
(12 Gy-RT). (C) Pearson correlation matrix based on label-free quantification
(LFQ) intensities, showing sample reproducibility in control and irradiated
groups. (D) Principal component analysis (PCA) plot for proteins identified
in biological replicates of control and irradiated groups.
Proteins were classified as identified with at
least one valid
MS/MS spectrum, quantified if detected in all five biological replicates,
and dysregulated if their relative abundance significantly differed
between the groups. Among the 2,457 quantified proteins, 414 proteins
were significantly dysregulated between irradiated and control groups,
and these proteins were used for further bioinformatics analysis.
Hierarchical clustering of z-scored LFQ intensities of dysregulated
proteins highlighted substantial expression differences between the
groups
(
Figure
A)
. Of the 414 dysregulated proteins, 157 were
upregulated, and 257 were downregulated (see
Table S3
). Given the small sample size, we calculated Cohen’s
d for all statistically significant proteins to better understand
the strength of the observed changes. Our analysis showed that many
of the proteins had large effect sizes (Cohen’s
d
> 1.0), supporting that the differences were statistically significant
and also biologically meaningful. In several cases, proteins with
moderate fold changes still showed large Cohen’s d values,
indicating strong and consistent differences between groups even with
a modest sample size. Volcano plots depicting these changes, with
the top 10 proteins in each category labeled, are shown in
Figure
B. Our microvessel
isolation likely includes multiple cell types beyond endothelial cells,
including pericytes and astrocytic end feet. To assess the cellular
composition, we compared our full proteomics data set (2,457 quantified
proteins) with a reference single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the
mouse brain vasculature
(Single Cell
RNA-seq Gene Expression Data). This analysis revealed that 127 marker
proteins were specifically enriched for endothelial cells, 97 marker
proteins for pericytes, and 63 marker proteins for astrocytes, confirming
a heterogeneous cellular profile (see
Table S4
). Among these, 7 endothelial specific proteins (Cd34, Dpp4, Lpcat4,
Slc6a6, Lyn, Col18a1, Ttr), 12 pericyte specific proteins (Itga4,
Rapgef5, Gjc1,Tfpi, Arhgdib, Egflam, Gja4, Atp2a3, Cpm, Myo1b, Mgp,Tgfb1i1)
and 23 astrocyte specific proteins (Slc6a1, Gabbr2, Bcan, Aldh1l1,
Ncam1, Btbd17, Cntn1, Dclk1, Myh14, Gpm6a, Bdh1, Soga3, Ogdhl, Sfxn5,
Plp1, Phgdh, Hapln1, Tst, Ckb, Slc27a1, Mapt, Cpe, Rtn1) were dysregulated
at 6 months postradiation exposure. Gene ontology (Biological Process)
analysis of endothelial cell-specific dysregulated proteins revealed
enrichment in pathways related to regulation of cell adhesion mediated
by integrins (GO:0033638), hemopoiesis (GO:0030097), and positive
regulation of cellular processes (GO:0048522). Dysregulated pericyte-specific
proteins were associated with negative regulation of protein binding
(GO:0032091), while dysregulated astrocyte-specific proteins were
enriched in processes such as central nervous system development (GO:0007417),
synapse organization (GO:0050808), and brain development (GO:0007420).
2
Significant
differences in the cerebral microvessel proteomes between
control and irradiated groups. (A) Hierarchical clustering analysis
(heatmap) using unsupervised Euclidean distance for differentially
expressed proteins across biological replicates. Z-Scored LFQ intensities
for individual mice are shown side by side. (B) Volcano plots of differentially
expressed proteins, with the
y
-axis representing
a −log10
p
-value significance and the
x
-axis representing log2 fold change. The top 10 proteins
with the most significant decrease and increase in expression are
highlighted in blue and red, respectively (
p
<
0.05). The dotted line indicates the cutoff for protein expression
fold change (log2) against statistical significance [−log10
(
p
-value)]. (C) GO cellular components, (D) GO biological
processes, and (E) GO molecular function analysis of significantly
dysregulated proteins compared to the control group. The top 10 enriched
GO terms are displayed with corrected p-values and gene numbers. The
colored bar indicates enriched terms with corresponding corrected
p
-values and gene numbers. Analyses were performed using
the HemI 2.0 web tool.
To investigate the biological significance of the
dysregulated
proteins, we utilized the Helm webtool for further analysis. The highest
representation of dysregulated proteins was observed in the cellular
components “mitochondrion”, “mitochondrial inner
membrane”, and “nuclear speck”, a specialized
subnuclear structure associated with splicing factors (
Figure
C). Regarding biological processes,
proteins involved in mRNA splicing and processing, as well as the
TCA cycle and mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I assembly,
were predominantly affected (
Figure
D). For molecular function, dysregulated proteins were
primarily associated with protein and RNA binding activities (
Figure
E). A complete list
of these categories and their corrected p-values is provided in
Table S5
.
Impact Pathway Analysis
In addition, we analyzed all
changes with iPathwayGuide that unlike other functional analysis tools,
considers a gene’s position within each pathway and its interactions
with other genes. The analysis revealed that the significantly dysregulated
proteins were enriched in 266 pathways, with strongest impact on metabolic
pathways, nucleocytoplasmic transport, one carbon metabolism, oxidative
phosphorylation, spliceosome, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle
(
Figure
A-F).
3
Impact pathway (iPathway guide) analysis of dysregulated
proteins
by RT. (A–F) Bar graphs showing dysregulated proteins mapped
to pathways identified by iPathway analysis based on FDR-corrected
p
-value significance: (A) metabolic pathways, (B) nucleocytoplasmic
transport, (C) one carbon metabolism, (D) oxidative phosphorylation,
(E) spliceosome, and (F) TCA cycle. Genes are ranked by absolute log-fold
change, with upregulated genes in red and downregulated genes in blue.
Box-and-whisker plots summarize the distribution of differentially
expressed genes in each pathway, with boxes representing the first
quartile, median, and third quartile, and circles indicating outliers.
Additionally, several nonmetabolic pathways were
significantly
enriched in irradiated cerebral microvessels, including cGMP-PKG signaling,
vascular smooth muscle contraction, mRNA surveillance, calcium signaling
(
Figure S1 A-E
)
, focal
adhesion, tight junction, and gap junction,
(
Figure S2 A-C
)
. Moreover, proteins
enriched in the spliceosome and mRNA surveillance pathways were upregulated
in irradiated group, potentially suggesting an increased stress response
and errors in mRNA processing due to radiation exposure. A complete
list of enriched pathways and their corrected p-values is available
in
Table S6
.
The core analysis module
in the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
software was used to identify altered canonical pathways in cerebral
microvessels following RT. Using a -log (p-value) cutoff of 1.3 (Fisher’s
exact test) and a z-score threshold (Z-score >2 for activation,
Z-score
< −2 for inhibition), 76 enriched canonical pathways were
identified. Of these, 68 pathways were predicted to be inhibited and
8 activated post-RT.
Figure
A-C
and
Table S7
highlight
15 canonical pathways associated with cerebral microvessel function.
Based on altered protein expression, the three most significantly
inhibited pathways were oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle,
and Gαq signaling, while the five most significantly activated
pathways included mitochondrial dysfunction, sirtuin signaling, granzyme
A signaling, the spliceosomal cycle, and RHOGDI signaling.
4
Ingenuity pathway
analysis (IPA) of all dysregulated proteins from
the irradiated group. (A) Fifteen selected canonical pathways predicted
to be activated or inhibited based on z-scores and a B–H
p
-value of <0.05 (calculated using Fisher’s exact
test and adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg method). A positive
z-score (orange) indicates pathway activation, while a negative z-score
(blue) indicates inhibition. Longer bars indicate stronger significance
(source:
http://www.INGENUITY.com
). (B) Heatmap of the top 10 transcription regulators predicted to
be activated (z-scores > 2) or inhibited (z-scores < −2).
(C) Predicted activation or inhibition of selected diseases and biofunctions
based on z-scores (>2 for activation; <−2 for inhibition)
in the irradiated group.
An upstream regulator analysis using the z-score
algorithm identified
34 enriched transcription regulators in irradiated cerebral microvessels.
The top activated regulators were KDM5A (Z-score = 4.243), CLPB (Z-score
= 3.742), HOXA10 (Z-score = 2.714), and RELA (Z-score = 2.201), while
the top inhibited regulators included TEAD1 (Z-score = −4.899),
PPARGC1A (Z-score = −4.872), RB1 (Z-score = −3.90),
HNF1A (Z-score = −2.985), and MITF (Z-score = −2.887)
(
Figure
B). A disease
and biofunction analysis of 414 differentially expressed proteins
revealed enrichment for 41 diseases and biological functions postradiation
exposure. Of these, 31 functions were predicted to be inhibited, while
10 were activated.
Figure
C depicts the selected 10 enriched diseases/biological functions,
associated molecules, and their p-values and z-scores. Notable affected
functions in cerebral microvessels after RT included cell migration,
cell-to-cell contact, ATP synthesis, molecule transport, and fatty
acid metabolism, as detailed in
Table S7
.
RT Induces Changes in the Expression of Mitochondrial Proteins
within Cerebral Microvessels
Given the strong evidence for
changes in the mitochondrial proteome by different analysis tools,
we investigated the impact of RT on mitochondrial protein expression
and associated functions in more detail. We mapped all 2,467 quantified
cerebral microvessel proteins to the Mouse Mitocarta3.0 database.
This analysis identified 385 mitochondrial proteins, with 84 significantly
dysregulated (all downregulated) in the irradiated group compared
to controls
(
Figure
A;
Table S8
)
. Volcano plots for mitochondrial proteins depicting these
changes, with the top 10 downregulated proteins are labeled, are shown
in
Figure
B.
We created a hierarchical cluster heatmap using the LFQ intensity
of significantly dysregulated mitochondrial proteins, clearly separating
control and irradiated groups (
Figure
C).
5
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of mitochondrial proteins
that
are dysregulated in the irradiated group. (A) Venn diagram showing
84 mitochondrial proteins shared between the mitochondrial proteome
database (Mitocarta 3.0) and the cerebral microvessel proteome. (B)
Volcano plot of differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins in
irradiated group (top 10 proteins are labeled). (C) Top 10 predicted
canonical pathways based on z-scores and B–H
p
-values <0.05 (calculated using Fisher’s exact test and
adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg method). A positive z-score
(orange) indicates pathway activation, while a negative z-score (blue)
indicates inhibition (source:
http://www.INGENUITY.com
). (D) Heatmap of the top 10 transcription
regulators predicted to be activated (z-scores > 2) or inhibited
(z-scores
< −2). (E) Predicted activation or inhibition of selected
diseases and biofunctions based on z-scores (>2 for activation;
<−2
for inhibition) in the irradiated group.
To confirm the biological significance of these
changes and their
impact on mitochondrial function, we performed gene ontology (GO)
analysis with the Helm webtool. The most affected proteins were linked
to the mitochondrial inner membrane, mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex I, and mitochondrial matrix (
Figure S3 A
,
Table S9
). Key impacted biological
processes included mitochondrial respiration, the tricarboxylic acid
cycle, and 2-oxoglutarate metabolic process (
Figure S3 B
).
Using IPA core analysis, we examined affected
canonical pathways
in the mitochondrial protein data set. This analysis identified 14
enriched pathways, 10 predicted to be inhibited and 4 activated following
radiation treatment. The top three inhibited pathways were oxidative
phosphorylation, neutrophil extracellular trap signaling, and the
TCA cycle (
Figure
D). Additionally, upstream regulator analysis for transcription factors
associated with mitochondrial proteins identified 14 enriched regulators.
Among those, CLPB, and HIF1A were the top activated regulators, while
TEAD1, PPARGC1A, and RB1 were the most inhibited (
Figure
E).
Table S10
provides a comprehensive list of canonical pathways, upstream
regulators, and associated p-values. Lastly, we used IPA software
to map altered diseases and biological functions based on dysregulated
mitochondrial proteins. The analysis highlighted 22 enriched diseases
and functions, 17 predicted to be inhibited and 5 activated. Notably,
ATP synthesis and nucleic acid metabolism were predicted to decrease,
while synthesis, production and metabolism of reactive oxygen species
were predicted to increase (
Figure
F).
Metabolic Pathways Are Affected in Cerebral Microvessels after
RT
Energy metabolism is essential for biosynthetic processes
to facilitate the restoration of cell damage. While previous studies
have extensively explored the impact of radiation on cardiac energy
metabolism
,
,
and metabolic pathways in other tissues
,
the impact of radiation on cerebral microvessel metabolism is less
understood. Our proteomic analysis revealed altered expression of
proteins linked to key metabolic pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation
(n = 29), the TCA cycle (n = 15), and glycolysis (n = 7) (
Figure S4 A-C
). IPA analysis suggested inhibition
of oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle, glycolysis, and gluconeogenesis.
To confirm these findings, we used Western blotting to analyze dysregulated
proteins in oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle, and glycolysis.
Our analysis revealed radiation-induced changes in the expression
of proteins across various OXPHOS system complexes. Western blot images
for different OXPHOS protein subunits with adjustment for loading
by Ponceau-stained whole membranes
(
Figure S5 A-E
)
revealed significant downregulation
of complex I proteins NDUFA11 and NDUFB8 (
Figure
A-C
), complex II protein SDHB
(
Figure
A-C
), and complex IV protein MT-CO2 (
Figure
A-C
) in irradiated samples.
Although downregulation of complex III and V proteins ATP5F1C, ATP6VID,
and ATP5F1A was observed, these changes did not reach statistical
significance (
Figure
A-C
,
Figure S6 A–D
).
6
Validation of metabolic protein expression changes by
immunoblot.
(A) Representative immunoblot images for OXPHOS complex subunits in
control and irradiated groups. (B) Ponceau-stained membrane used as
loading control. (C) Immunoblots of ETC complex I proteins (NDUFA11,
NDUFA4, and NDUFB8), complex II proteins (SDHA and SDHB), complex
III protein (UQCRC2), complex IV proteins (COX6B1 and MT-CO2), and
complex V proteins (ATP5F1C, ATP6VID, and ATP5F1A) in control and
irradiated groups. Quantification of protein levels after normalization
to Ponceau-stained membrane. Analysis by the Mann–Whitney test.
Lastly, we examined proteins involved in the TCA
cycle, glycolysis,
and pyruvate transport proteins and detected nonsignificant trends
toward decreases for TCA cycle proteins UQCRC2, ACLY, ACO2, IDH3A,
DLD, SDHA, and MDH2 in the irradiated group (
Figure S 7A-B
). Similarly, analysis of glycolysis and pyruvate transport
proteins revealed similar trends for glycolytic proteins TPI and ENOL2
as well as mitochondrial pyruvate carrier proteins MPC1 and MPC2 in
the irradiated group (
Figure S 7C–D and Figure S 8A-B
).
Discussion
Our study provides the first in-depth analysis
of long-term proteome
changes in nontumor cerebral microvessels following RT in C57Bl6J
mice, offering key insights into the impact of radiation on vascular
health. A total of 414 dysregulated proteins were identified, with
257 showing downregulation. These findings highlight mitochondrial
dysfunction and metabolic disruptions as central themes, with notable
effects on pathways such as oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle,
and glycolysis.
Pathway enrichment analysis revealed significant
alterations in
266 pathways. Among 76 canonical pathways, 68 were inhibited (e.g.,
oxidative phosphorylation), while 8 were activated (e.g., mitochondrial
dysfunction). Mitochondrial proteins were particularly impacted, with
a detailed analysis identifying 84 downregulated proteins linked to
the mitochondrial inner membrane and respiratory chain complex I,
indicating disrupted energy metabolism.
Proteomic changes also
revealed inhibition of ATP synthesis, cell
migration, and other cellular processes through pathways such as nucleo-cytosolic
transport and spliceosomal activity. Increased oxidative stress was
evidenced by the activation of reactive oxygen species synthesis,
potentially as a result of mitochondrial dysfunction. Enriched disease-related
processes further pointed to disruptions in molecule transport and
fatty acid metabolism. Western blot analysis of OXPHOS proteins confirmed
inhibited energy metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction. These findings
underscore the lasting effects of RT caused by RT in cerebral microvessels,
particularly on mitochondrial health and metabolic pathways.
Given the strong impact of RT on the mitochondrial proteome, our
study focused on changes in the mitochondrial and metabolic proteome.
In most vascular beds, endothelial cells (ECs) predominantly use glycolysis
and depend minimally on mitochondrial OXPHOS for ATP generation, as
mitochondrial volume in ECs constitutes only 2–6% of total
cellular volume.
,
However, cerebromicrovascular
ECs at the BBB possess nearly double the mitochondrial volume compared
to other vascular beds.
The BBB represents
a selective yet dynamic interface between the blood and central nervous
system that rigorously maintains neuronal homeostasis by regulating
the transport of substances to and from the brain.
,
The cerebral microvasculature engages in aerobic respiration to
support the energy demands required for maintaining transport systems
and barrier function.
Doll and colleagues
reported that mitochondrial “crisis” induced by a lipopolysaccharide
challenge in cerebromicrovascular ECs significantly compromises BBB
function in vitro and in vivo
but similar
data after RT have been missing so far.
Since glycolysis is
the primary metabolic pathway for energy production
in ECs, it remains to be established how the extensive alterations
in metabolic function following RT affect EC phenotypes. As such,
further studies are needed to explore the positive link between energy
depletion and EC dysfunction, for example, whether energy deficiency
drives or results from long-term changes post-RT, including altered
BBB permeability, cellular senescence, impaired angiogenesis, increased
inflammation, reduced nitric oxide production, and a pro-thrombotic
state.
,
−
Since these changes may contribute to complications
like neuroinflammation and ischemia in irradiated areas, largely due
to the disruption of vascular homeostasis, targeting metabolic pathways
may offer a novel approach to mitigating these long-term side effects.
Beyond metabolism, mitochondrial signaling is gaining recognition
for its role in RT-induced tissue injury.
−
While mitochondrial reactive
oxygen species (ROS) have been highlighted as mediators of mitochondrial
DNA damage and ETC dysfunction in ECs, additional factors, such as
altered mitochondrial calcium in- and efflux, may also contribute.
,
,
,
Moreover, mitochondrial DNA fragments as damage-associated molecular
patterns may drive inflammatory signaling cascades after RT.
Additional to changes in the mitochondrial
and metabolic proteome,
our findings highlight dysregulation in proteins related to mRNA splicing
and stress-response pathways, suggesting that RT drives transcriptional
and post-transcriptional modifications.
These changes potentially disrupt cellular homeostasis and protein
synthesis, aggravating vascular dysfunction and warrant further investigation.
This study has several limitations. First, exclusively male mice
were used. This was done to reduce variability due to the during the
estrous cycle. However, given emerging evidence for differences in
radiosensitivity in males versus females, findings should be validated
in female mice as well,
to understand
sex-dependent differences in radiation response particularly in microvascular
injury and cognitive outcomes. Second, the current bulk proteomics
approach does not allow for the resolution of contributions from distinct
vascular-associated cell types, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and
endothelial cells. Advanced techniques, including single-cell proteomics,
spatial transcriptomics, or fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
of purified cell populations, will be essential for achieving higher-resolution,
cell-type-specific insights into radiation-induced vascular injury
responses. Third, our observations were limited to a single postradiation
time point and a modest sample size. Future studies with multiple
time points and larger cohorts are needed to capture the temporal
dynamics of microvascular injury and to improve sensitivity for detecting
subtle changes in protein expression following radiation exposure.
Lastly, mitochondrial cell lysate preparation, additional validation
and mechanistic follow-up studies are necessary to confirm the proteomics
data and bioinformatics predictions, particularly those related to
mitochondrial function, blood-brain barrier integrity, and RNA processing
pathways.
In conclusion, this study provides the first evidence
of radiation-induced
proteomic alterations in the cerebral microvasculature, including
mitochondrial dysfunction, disruption of metabolic pathways and dysregulation
of vascular signaling pathways. To our knowledge, this is the first
investigation to employ a quantitative proteomics approach to characterize
microvascular changes in the brain following RT. These findings shed
light on potential mechanisms underlying radiation-induced BBB breakdown
and highlight the need for further investigation into the role of
mitochondria in endothelial cells and other vascular-associated cell
types. They also underscore the need for further research to understand
the interplay between mitochondrial integrity, cellular metabolism
and vascular health in the context of radiation exposure.
Supplementary Material