Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common malignant tumor in female patients (
1
); according to data from the World Health Organization, in 2020, there were ~2.26 million new breast cancer cases worldwide, threatening their lives by affecting both physical and psychological health (
2
,
3
). The latest advancements in treatment have mainly focused on the use of molecular biology and immunological approaches to develop highly targeted therapies for different types of breast cancer. This has been explored through inhibiting specific targets or molecules that promote tumor progression (
4
). Due to the presence of different subtypes and differences in treatment modalities (
5
), it is common to categorize breast cancers on the basis of expression patterns of three receptors: Estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal growth factor-2 (HER2) receptor, or as a triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Most patients suffer from estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers; the majority of patients have estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, accounting for >70% of all cases (
6
),
in vitro
models are primarily represented by MCF-7 cells. Endocrine therapy, usually using tamoxifen (TAM), has been shown to markedly prolong the survival of patients with breast cancer (
7
). TNBC, a subtype in which estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors are not expressed, accounts for 12–17% of invasive breast cancers (
8
,
9
) and 83% of total mortalities (
10
). Compared with other breast cancer subtypes, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), represented by the MDA-MB-231 cell line
in vitro
, has the highest recurrence and metastasis rates and is exemplified by development at a young age and a poor prognosis (
11
). Currently, there are no effective treatments other than surgery, radiation and chemotherapy therapy. Doxorubicin (DOX) is widely used to treat TNBC (
12
), as a chemotherapy drug, therefore in the present study, both TAM and DOX were chosen to induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells.
Multiple transcription factors have been reported to regulate proliferation and apoptosis in breast cancer cells (
13
,
14
). These transcription factors achieve these effects by controlling protein translation and degradation. Consequently, interactions between proteins and transcription factors play a crucial role in the initiation and progression of breast cancer (
15
,
16
). The transcription factor FoxO3a has potent tumor suppressor effects in a variety of malignancies, such as gastric, prostate and colorectal cancers (
17
–
19
). RNA interference targeting FOXO3a was used to measure the impact of simvastatin on FOXO3a-expressing cells (
20
). Therefore, the present study performed FoxO3a knockdown. Previous studies have shown that low expression of FoxO3a could inhibit the apoptosis of tumor cells (
21
,
22
).
The application of proteomics allows for the discovery of additional proteins, which can provide insight into the mechanisms of disease and identify specific biomarkers that induce apoptosis. In the present study, small interfering (si)RNA-negative control (NC) and si-FoxO3a cel ls from two types of breast cancer were treated with TAM and DOX to construct estrogen-dependent and triple-negative si-FoxO3a breast cancer cell lines. The aims were to validate the effect on drug-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells after interference with FoxO3a, analyze the signaling pathways that serve a role in the regulation of apoptosis after treatment via proteomics; and validate the signaling pathway-associated differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The present study hypothesizes that targeting regulatory proteins in protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway could lead to timely detection of breast cancer metastasis and improve treatment outcomes.
Materials and methods
Cell culture
Breast epithelial cells, MCF-10A, and breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 were purchased from the Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences. The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) and high-glucose DMEM (both Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), supplemented with 10% FBS (EvaCell) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin (Cytiva) at 37°C with 5% CO
2
.
Cell transfection
A total of 2.5×10
5
cells/well (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) were seeded into 6-well plates and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Liposomal transfection of siRNA was performed the following day when the cell density reached 60% using the transfection reagent Lipofectamine
®
3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) for 24 h at 37°C. The siRNAs were designed by our laboratory staff and synthesized by Guangzhou Ruibo Biotechnology Co., Ltd. In addition, 1,750 ml basal medium, 5 µl siRNA, 5 µl transfection reagent and 240 µl serum-free medium was added to each well. At 8 h after transfection in serum-free medium, the medium was replaced with complete medium and the cells were incubated for a further 24 h. si-FoxO3a target sequence was 5′-AATGATGGGGGGCTGACTGAAA-3′, synthesized by RiboBio Biotechnology, the initial siRNA transfection concentration is 50 nmol.
Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)
Total cellular RNA was extracted with TRIzol
®
reagent (Invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) for reverse transcription (SureScript™ First-Strand cDNA; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The quality and concentration of the extracted RNA was analyzed using spectrophotometry (NanoDrop Technologies; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Reverse transcription conditions are as follows: 25°C 5 min, 42°C 15 min, 85°C 5 min. Blaze Taq SYBR
®
Green qPCR Mix 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) was used for RT-qPCR experiments. Thermocycling conditions: 95°C pre-denaturation for 10 min, 95°C denaturation for 15 sec, 60°C annealing for 1 min, 72°C extension for 30 sec, repeated for 40 cycles, with three replicate wells per sample, and the transcript levels were normalized to those of GAPDH. Gene expression levels were analyzed using the 2
−ΔΔCq
method (
23
). The following primers were used: GAPDH-forward (F): 5′-ACCCACTCCTCCACCTTTGAC-3′; GAPDH-reverse (R): 5′-TGTTGCTGTAGCCAAATTCGTT-3′; FoxO3a-F: 5′-CGGACAAACGGCTCACTCT-3′; FoxO3a-R: 5′-GGACCCGCATGAATCGACTAT-3′;
Western blotting
Experiments were performed with MCF-7/MDA-MB-231 si-NC and si-FoxO3a cells treated with TAM/DOX for 24 h, which were both washed twice with PBS and lysed on ice for 30 min with the addition of lysis buffer(Beyotime Biotechnology). Centrifugation was performed at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using the Enhanced BCA Protein Assay kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology). A total of 5 µg/lane protein per well, separated by SDS-PAGE (5% concentrating and 5% separating gel), transferred to a PVDF membrane and incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: GAPDH (1:1,000; cat. no.
P04406
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), FoxO3a (1:1,000; cat. no.
O43524
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), trophoblast glycoprotein (TPBG; 1:1,000; cat. no.
Q13641
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), sodium-coupled neutral amino acid symporter 2 (SLC38A2; 1:1,000; cat. no. DF4673; Affinity Biosciences), asparagine synthetase (ASNS; 1:1,000; cat. no.
P08243
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), phosphorylated (p)-FOXO3a (1:1,000; cat. no.
O43524
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.) and zyxin (ZYX; 1:1,000; cat. no.
Q15942
; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.). The membrane was washed three times, incubated with a goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (1:1,000; cat. no. 210830803; Beijing Zhongshan Jinqiao Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) for 1 h at room temperature, and the results were detected with a chemiluminescent ECL detection system(Thermo Fisher). The experiments all contained three independent biological replicates, and three technical replicates were used for each biological replicate to ensure data reliability.
Water-soluble tetrazolium salt (WST-1) assay
A total of 6×10
3
cells per well were seeded in a 96-well plate, and three replicate wells were used for each group. When the density reached 80–90%, the culture medium was discarded, and 100 µl different concentrations of TAM/DOX were added. Each well had 10 µl WST-1 reagent added 24 h after the drug treatment, the reaction was carried out at 37°C for 15–30 min and the optical density value was assessed at the wavelength of 460 nm. The experiments all contained three independent biological replicates, and three technical replicates were used for each biological replicate to ensure data reliability.
Cell apoptosis
A total of 2.5×10
5
cells were seeded in a 6-well plate and digested with trypsin. Following centrifugation for 10 min at 4°C, 12,000 × g the cells were resuspended in PBS, centrifuged again and then, according to the protocol of the FITC-coupled Annexin-V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Biosciences), each sample was mixed with 490 µl 1X binding buffer and 5 µl each of FITC and PI dyes. The cells were stained for 20 min at room temperature, protected from light and assessed using flow cytometry within 1 h. There were 10,000 cells in each group. The experiments all contained three independent biological replicates, and three technical replicates were used for each biological replicate to ensure data reliability.
Hoechst staining
Hoechst 33342 is a dye that penetrates cell membranes, causing living cells to fluoresce blue. When apoptosis occurs with inconsistent nuclear fragmentation; the brightness of the blue fluorescence is increased. A total of 10,000 si-NC and si-FoxO3a cells were cultured for 6–8 h, the cells were treated with the drugs for 24 h, the supernatant was discarded and the cells were washed twice with precooled PBS. Hoechst 33342 staining solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) was added, and the cells were stained for 15–20 min at room temperature, before being washed three times with precooled PBS at 4°C for 5 min each. The fluorescent intensity of the cells was observed using fluorescence microscopy. The experiments all contained three independent biological replicates, and three technical replicates were used for each biological replicate to ensure data reliability.
Wound healing assay
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded into 6-well plates (3×10
5
and 5×10
5
/well, respectively), and the transfection and drug treatments were carried out as aforementioned. After the cells grew to 90% confluence, a sterile tip was used to scratch the cells. Cell debris was removed by washing with PBS and the cells were cultured in serum-free medium for 24 h. Images were acquired using a fluorescence microscope (magnification, ×10) at 0 and 24 h after scratching. The relative size of the wound area from 0 to 24 h was measured using Image J software(National Institutes of Health; version no. 1.47) to calculate the cell migration rate. The experiments all contained three independent biological replicates, and three technical replicates were used for each biological replicate to ensure data reliability.
Proteomics processing
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells treated with TAM/DOX drugs for 24 h were recorded as control (ctrl)-TAM and ctrl-DOX, respectively. FoxO3a knockdown cells treated with drugs for 24 h were recorded as si-TAM and si-DOX. After treatment, the cell precipitate was collected, 20% trichloroacetic acid was added, the mixture was vortexed well and the cells were left to precipitate for 2 h at 4°C. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 4°C, 4,500 × g for 5 min, and the precipitate was washed with precooled acetone 2–3 times. The precipitate was allowed to dry, a final concentration of 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate was added, the precipitate was broken by ultrasonication and it was enzymatically digested overnight. Dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Iodine-acetyl carbamate was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The confidence interval for the difference in the protein quantification ratio between the si-FoxO3a and the si-NC group was assessed as the multiplicity of differences, with a fold-change >1.2 and P<0.05. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification and peptide-spectrum match identification in the search database settings was 1%, revealing that different protein networks existed in both cancer cell lines after interfering with FoxO3a expression.
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis was performed by Jingjie PTM Bio-Laboratory (Hangzhou) Co., Ltd. using positive ionization mode. The primary mass spectrometry scan range was 400–1,200 m/z with a resolution of 60,000. The fixed starting point for the secondary mass spectrometry scan range was 110 m/z, with a secondary scan resolution of 15,000. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid chromatography gradient settings were as follows: 0–68 min, 6–23%B; 68–82 min: 23–32%B; 82–86 min: 32–80%B; 86–90 min: 80%B. Flow rate maintained constant at 500 nl/min.
Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG(Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) functional enrichment analysis, and STRING protein interactions
GO (geneontology.org) and KEGG (kegg.jp) functional enrichment analyses were performed based on secondary categorization and Fisher's exact test was applied to calculate the significance P-value with the aim of determining whether DEPs were significantly enriched in certain functional types. The FDR value in enrichment analysis is set to 1%. Directly copy or import the identified differentially expressed proteins into the STRING database (cn.string-db.org).
Statistical analyses
A Student's t-test (unpaired)was used to compare differences between two groups, and a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test was used to compare differences between multiple groups. Calculations were performed using SPSS Statistics 17.0 (IBM Corp.) software, with normality analysis being performed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Three replications were performed for all the experiments, and the data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
Results
Assessment of baseline expression levels of FoxO3a and successful knockdown of FoxO3a
FoxO3a expression was examined in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells using RT-qPCR and western blotting, which demonstrated that FoxO3a levels were detected in both cell types (
Fig. 1A and B
). FoxO3a was successfully knocked down by transfection of siRNA for 24 h. RT-qPCR was used to assess the knockdown efficiency as shown in
Fig. 1C and D
.
si-FoxO3a decreases the degree of apoptosis
Annexin V/PI double staining demonstrates that si-FoxO3a hinders the apoptosis of breast cancer cells by antitumor drugs
The WST-1 assay was used to determine the optimal concentrations of TAM and DOX. This method is easy to perform, produces stable results and has low cytotoxicity. The results of the WST-1 assay revealed that the apoptosis rate of si-FoxO3a MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells by 25 µmol/ml and 30 µmol/ml TAM and DOX respectively, was decreased compared with the si-NC cells (
Fig. 2A and B
). Flow cytometry was used to analyze the proapoptotic effects of 0 and 25 µmol/ml TAM drug treatments for 24 h on si-NC and si-FoxO3a MCF-7 cells, and 0 and 30 µmol/ml DOX drug treatments for 24 h on si-NC and si-FoxO3a MDA-MB-231 cells. The results (
Fig. 2C and D
) revealed that the apoptosis rates of the si-NC and si-FoxO3a MCF-7 cells were 8.95±0.04% and 7.81±1.17%, respectively, and the apoptotic rates of si-NC and si-FoxO3a MDA-MB-231 cells were 11.56±2.22% and 8.31±0.20%, respectively, when cultured for 24 h without treatment. The differences were not found to be statistically significant. These findings indicate that the transfection of siRNA had no significant effect on the level of apoptosis in either type of breast cancer cells. By contrast, when treated with drugs for 24 h, the apoptosis rates of the si-NC and si-FoxO3a treated MCF-7 cells were 21.22±0.88% and 10.10±0.44%, respectively, and the apoptosis rates of si-NC and si-FoxO3a MDA-MB-231 cells were 24.19±0.60% and 13.67±0.35%, respectively. The level of apoptosis in si-FoxO3a cells was significantly reduced after treatment with the drug, demonstrating that interfering with FoxO3a decreases the sensitivity of cancer cells to the drug.
Hoechst staining demonstrates that si-FoxO3a hinders the inhibitory effect of antitumor drugs on breast cancer cells
si-NC cells and si-FoxO3a cells without drug treatment presented with dark blue fluorescence staining of the nuclei. After drug treatment for 24 h, the nuclear staining of the two types of breast cancer cells was not homogeneous, as there was some nuclear fragmentation, indicated by increased fluorescence brightness. Furthermore, the levels of nuclear fragmentation in si-FoxO3a cells were significantly reduced compared with si-NC cells. This indicates reduced apoptosis of si-FoxO3a cells. Quantification of the nuclear fragmentation levels is presented in
Fig. 3A and B
.
Wound healing assay demonstrates enhanced migration of si-FoxO3a cells
Subsequently, the migration of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 si-NC and si-FoxO3a cells towards the scratched area was observed. Without drug treatment, there was no significant difference in migration rates between si-NC and si-FoxO3a cancer cells. Following 24 h treatment with TAM and DOX, respectively, the migration rate of si-FoxO3a cells was significantly increased compared to the si-NC group (
Fig. 4A and B
). This indicates that FoxO3a knockdown reduces cancer cell death and enhances their migratory capacity.
Proteomics analysis of DEPs in si-FoxO3a
The study consisted of si-FoxO3a and si-NC groups for label-free quantitative proteomics analysis, with three biological replicates for each group. A screen for DEPs by the ratio of quantitative values of DEPs in si-FoxO3a to si-NC cells revealed 206 DEPs in MCF-7 and 207 DEPs in MDA-MB-231 cells, with 15 proteins in crossover and subcellular localization analysis. The volcano plots (
Fig. 3C and D
) show that TPBG, SLC38A2, ATP binding cassette subfamily D member 1, endothelin converting enzyme 1, ASNS, ferritin heavy chain 1 (FTH1), ZYX, stomatin, solute carrier family 2 member 1 (SLC2A1), serpin family B member 5, prothymosin α, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (NADP
+
dependent) 2, high mobility group box 2 and chromatin target of PRMT1 (CHTOP) were DEPs common to the two types of cells after knockdown of FoxO3a. The presence of coregulatory proteins could provide new perspectives on the treatment and mitigation of drug resistance in both types of breast cancer.
Subcellular localization analysis
Subcellular localization analysis was performed on the identified DEPs. DEPs in MCF-7 cells were located mainly in the nucleus (n=63), cytoplasm (n=55) and plasma membrane (n=24). DEPs in MDA-MB-231 cells were located predominantly in the nucleus (n=49), cytoplasm (n=47) and plasma membrane (n=34). Therefore, the nucleus and cytoplasm are the regions where DEPs are predominantly localized in these two types of breast cancer cells (
Fig. 5A and B
). This is a major region of protein synthesis and energy transfer, therefore alterations of proteins within this region can affect the structure and biological function of other relevant proteins and thus regulate breast cancer progression.
Gene Ontology (GO) secondary classification map
The GO database (geneontology.org) is designed to qualify and characterize gene and protein functions in three categories: Biological process (BP), molecular function (MF) and cellular component (CC). The y-axis represents the GO classification, and the x-axis represents the number of proteins.
Fig. 6A and B
shows the involvement of >100 differentially expressed upregulated and downregulated proteins in each of the three major classifications of the GO database. The DEPs of the two breast cancer cell lines coregulate BP processes such as ‘cellular process’, ‘biological regulation’, ‘metabolic process’, ‘response to stimulus’ and ‘multicellular organismal processes’. These proteins are primarily localized to the ‘intracellular anatomical structure’ and perform the MF of ‘binding’ (
Fig. 6A and B
).
KEGG secondary classification map
As shown in
Fig. 5
, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cellular DEPs share common BPs and functions across multiple KEGG secondary classifications. Most of these DEPs were involved in the CP of ‘transport and catabolism’ and ‘cell growth and death’; ‘signal transduction’ in EIP, suggesting a close relationship with signaling pathways; ‘translation’ and ‘folding, sorting and degradation’ in GIP, suggesting an association with protein structure and function; ‘infectious disease: viral’ and ‘cancer: overview’ in HD; ‘global and overview maps’ in metabolism; and the ‘endocrine system’ and ‘digestive system’ in OS (
Fig. 7A and B
). The description involved the process of protein digestion and absorption.
GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
To understand the functions of the DEPs, the GO database was used to classify the enrichment of the screened DEPs. The DEPs identified in MCF-7 cells were enriched mainly at the BP level in ‘ribosome biogenesis’ and ‘protein localization to the membrane’. The BP process of DEPs identified in MDA-MB-231 cells was enriched mainly in the ‘cell surface receptor signaling pathway’ and ‘regulation of the defense response’. Notably, the common molecular functions of DEPs in both breast cancer cell lines at the CC and MF levels, are mainly seen in the ‘extracellular space’ and ‘L-glutamine transmembrane transporter activity’ (
Fig. 8A-D
). This suggests that there are similar signaling pathway functions of the DEPs of two si-FoxO3a breast cancer cell types and they are associated with amino acid transport.
The results of KEGG enrichment analysis demonstrated that DEPs in two si-FoxO3a breast cancer cell lines after treatment with two drugs were enriched mainly in the ‘map04974 protein digestion and absorption’ and ‘map04978 mineral absorption’ signaling pathways (
Fig. 9A and B
). Considering the notable role that protein levels serve in the development of breast cancer, and the combined subcellular localization analysis and GO enrichment results, primarily targeting the activity of ‘L-glutamine transmembrane transporter activity’, demonstrated the role of transport proteins, the present study focused on the preceding signaling pathway (map04974).
FoxO3a regulates protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway-related proteins
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network mapping was performed for common DEPs and DEPs involved in apoptotic processes, together with FoxO3a, in two types of breast cancer cells. The findings indicated that the DEPs are closely related to each other and are involved in the regulation of protein digestion and absorption signaling pathways and apoptotic processes. -Therefore, DEPs identified in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells involved in the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway and apoptosis, were mapped together with FoxO3a. This was performed using the STRING database to identify potential relationships between the proteins (
Fig. 9C
).
Western blotting for verification of the DEPs
The DEPs identified in the two types of breast cancer cells were validated using western blotting, which revealed that TPBG were downregulated and that p-FoxO3a levels were increased in si-FoxO3a cells compared with si-NC cells. ASNS was upregulated in MCF-7 cells and downregulated in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with si-FoxO3a. In addition, ZYX was upregulated in MCF-7 cells, and downregulated in MDA-MB-231 cells. The validation results were consistent with the proteomics results (
Fig. 9D and E
).
Discussion
Breast cancer, a malignant tumor with a high incidence and mortality rate, is a serious threat to women's lives and health (
24
). Drug resistance, recurrence and metastasis affect its treatment and prognosis. Thus, the search for reliable molecular markers can aid in the implementation of targeted therapy strategies for breast cancer, to overcome resistance to existing chemotherapeutic agents. The estrogen receptor antagonist TAM can be used as a first-line therapeutic agent as ~70% of breast cancers are estrogen receptor-positive. DOX is one of the most active agents against metastatic breast cancer cells, especially TNBC, and targeting tumor cells by loading DOX-carrying liposomes onto the surface of macrophages can enhance antitumor immune responses (
25
). Some side effects are associated with prolonged drug use, and numerous efforts have been made by researchers to mitigate these effects and improve their efficacy (
26
). Existing studies have demonstrated that the sirtuin 1/AKT pathway can overcome DOX treatment resistance (
27
). Exploring signaling pathways may be an effective approach to improving drug efficacy. FoxO3a has gradually attracted the attention of researchers as a transcription factor that has tumor suppressor potential and is involved in multiple signaling pathways. We have previously demonstrated its notable regulatory role in a variety of malignant tumors (
28
), mainly involving regulating BPs such as apoptosis, autophagy, DNA damage repair and angiogenesis to influence tumor progression (
29
–
31
). Our previous experiments revealed that FoxO3a can be altered during drug-induced autophagy in MCF-7 cells (
21
). Therefore, the present study analyzed the changes in signaling pathway proteins that occur when TAM and DOX cause apoptosis in cancer cells. This was performed using proteomic analysis of si-FoxO3a treated cells to identify the metastatic process and provide a scientific basis for overcoming therapeutic resistance.
FoxO3a expression was assessed in two breast cancer cell lines before being successfully knocked down and evaluated using RT-qPCR. Control and FoxO3a knockdown cell models of estrogen-dependent MCF-7 cells and triple-negative MDA-MB-231 cells, were denoted as si-NC and si-FoxO3a, respectively. The concentrations of 25 and 30 µmol/ml for TAM and DOX, respectively, were determined using a WST-1 assay. The results demonstrated that si-FoxO3a cells were more resistant to drug-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells compared with the si-NC cells, suggesting that interference with FoxO3a can reduce cancer cell death and increase their migration rate. The upper right quadrant of the flow cytometry results may reflect a mixture of late apoptotic cells and necrotic cells. Therefore, the present study further verified the level of apoptosis using Hoechst staining, indicating the FoxO3a transcription factor promotes drug-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. This should be validated using FoxO3a overexpression vectors in the future.
A study by Li
et al
(
32
) demonstrated that FoxO3a can be used as a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer; therefore, the development of FoxO3a-targeted drugs shows promise. Most of the DEPs were localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm regions, which are also the main regions for protein synthesis and energy transfer. GO enrichment analysis revealed common molecular functions of DEPs in both breast cancer cell lines at the CC and MF levels, mainly the extracellular space and L-glutamine (Gln) transmembrane transporter activity. These findings suggest that the DEPs are involved in the same signaling pathways of both si-FoxO3a breast cancer cell lines and are related to amino acid transport. This suggests modulating associated signaling pathway proteins by knocking down FoxO3a may be a key mechanism for drug-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that the two si-FoxO3a breast cancer cell lines inhibited drug-induced apoptosis through the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway. DEPs were selected to map the PPI network together with FoxO3a, and the connections between the protein and FoxO3a were assessed. The regulation of apoptosis in breast cancer cells following knock down of FoxO3a expression may involve other or parallel pathways. As indicated by GO and KEGG secondary classifications, differentially expressed proteins in the two breast cancer cell lines jointly regulate processes such as ‘biological regulation’, ‘metabolic processes’, and ‘stimulus response’. Additionally, they are involved in ‘translation’ and ‘folding, sorting, and degradation’ in GIP. These processes are largely unrelated to mineral absorption, strongly suggesting an association with protein digestion and absorption functions. Therefore, the validation of proteins related to the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway was primarily focused on. DEPs TPBG, SLC38A2, ASNS, ZYX and p-FoxO3a were selected for subsequent validation using western blotting, which yielded results consistent with those of the proteomic analysis. After FoxO3a is phosphorylated by kinases such as AKT, it is translocated from the cell nucleus, leading to loss of activity and reduced expression. At this point, p-FoxO3a levels increase, and the AKT signaling pathway is generally activated. After FoxO3a is phosphorylated by kinases such as AKT, it translocated from the cell nucleus, leading to loss of activity and reduced expression.
The end products of protein digestion are amino acids, as seen in the cellular pathway diagram (
Fig. 10
) and the protein digestion and absorption pathway is mainly involved in the regulation of multiple amino acid transport proteins. The activation of cell signaling pathways is closely related to protein hydrolysis and pro-apoptotic processes, while the activation of protein digestion and absorption signaling pathways is mainly related to the levels of various amino acid transport proteins (
33
). TAM and DOX can cause mitochondrial damage and thus induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells. si-FoxO3a can impair this effect, as when Gln is transported into the cell via SLC38A2, it inhibits the levels of FoxO3a, research indicates that reduced FoxO3a expression leads to excessive glutamine consumption by activated T cells, promoting the tricarboxylic acid cycle and activating mTOR signaling to influence transport processes (
34
). Downregulating ASNS expression inhibits asparagine synthesis and its downstream mTOR pathway to suppress TNBC progression, while suppression of the mTOR signaling pathway affects FoxO3a levels (
35
); therefore, si-FoxO3a also affects ASNS expression by regulating the metabolism of various amino acids. Furthermore, it may directly affect the levels of ZYX and TPBG, and indirectly affects the levels of Wnt signaling, by regulating mTOR (
36
). This indicates a close relationship between FoxO3a and the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway. TPBG, SLC38A2, ASNS and ZYX are associated with protein digestion and absorption signaling pathways, hence these proteins were selected for validation.
Fig. 10
shows a hypothetical model by which the aforementioned DEPs may participate in the apoptosis process of breast cancer cells. The effect of FoxO3a on SLC38A2 and TPBG requires further experimental validation. TPBG is a transmembrane protein highly expressed mainly in trophoblast and cancer cells (
37
). It promotes pancreatic cancer cell metastasis through the Wnt signaling pathway, affecting the Wnt downstream protein signaling cascade, causing increased cancer cell migration and reducing apoptosis (
38
). It also induces lung cancer cell invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition by inhibiting the levels of microRNA-15b present (
39
). The ectopic expression of TPBG markedly promotes the migration and invasive ability of two TNBC lines (
40
). Studies have demonstrated that TPBG is a therapeutic target for several anticancer drugs currently in clinical development, mainly because of its high expression in tumors and low expression in normal tissues (
41
,
42
).
Tumor cells usually take up large quantities of amino acids from the extracellular environment to sustain proliferation and metastasis. Therefore, the upregulation of certain amino acid transporter proteins to obtain large amounts of amino acids acts as an important source of energy for tumor cells (
43
). The SLC family of proteins contains dozens of members that transport different amino acid types (
44
). The membrane transporter protein SLC38A2 is mainly responsible for the transport of neutral amino acids, such as Gln (
33
), and is involved in a range of energy metabolism processes. Therefore, the upregulation of SLC38A2 may help maintain enlarged cell volume to sustain proliferation, thus reducing cell apoptosis. Meanwhile, increased SLC38A2 expression promotes glutamine-dependent cell proliferation and is associated with low survival and resistance to TAM in patients with TNBC (
45
,
46
).
Additional studies have demonstrated that the development of drugs targeting SLC38A2 may be of value in some hormone-resistant breast cancers (
45
,
47
), demonstrating the importance of its role in future clinical applications. ASNS uses glutamate to provide a nitrogen source to enable aspartic acid to synthesize asparagine (
48
), and studies have demonstrated that its high expression promotes breast cancer metastasis and colorectal cancer progression (
49
,
50
). The downregulation of ASNS inhibits the induction of cell cycle arrest and suppresses cell proliferation (
51
). With this, its expression levels are associated with that of apoptosis, thus harboring the potential to serve as a prognostic marker for breast cancer (
52
). ASNS inhibition is essential for targeting asparagine metabolism in cancer (
53
). Previous studies have demonstrated that elevated asparagine levels catalyzed by ASNS are key for breast cancer metastasis (
53
,
54
). Inhibition of the Gln-associated pathway does not reduce the viability of all cancer cell lines, even in Gln-dependent TNBC cell lines (
55
). Therefore, the low expression of ASNS in si-FoxO3a MDA-MB-231 cells may be due to the substitution of other amino acids for Gln, which serve a role in maintaining the growth of breast cancer cells, resulting in reduced levels of ASNS. This is a hypothesis; therefore, further verification is ultimately required.
ZYX is mainly responsible for the interaction between cells and the extracellular matrix and is involved in the organization and regeneration of the cytoskeleton. It is also involved in in the regulation of adhesion-mediated extracellular matrix signaling (
56
) to influence the downstream pathways related to cell migration, invasion and apoptosis. ZYX functions not only as an oncogenic protein, but also as an antitumor protein in carcinogenesis (
57
). On one hand, ZYX promotes the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma by activating the AKT/mTOR signaling pathway (
58
). ZYX acts as an inhibitor of the growth of colorectal cancer cells and is associated with the levels of p53 (
59
). Therefore, its role in different types of breast cancer warrants further investigation (
60
).
It is important to acknowledge the limitations of the present study, as rescue experiments could not be performed due to particular constraints, and only two cell lines were available for experimentation. Additionally, due to a lack of
in vivo
experiments to differentially validate the relationship between the proteins, further exploration is needed to achieve this in the future. Further limitations that should also be noted include the need for verification of the association between FoxO3a and proteins such as SLC38A2 and TPBG. This requires more exploration in future studies. In addition, the proteomics analysis section of the present study was performed by an external service provider. The P-values reported were not corrected, and the lack of multiple testing correction may have resulted in a higher false positive rate.
Breast cancer development involves numerous proteins and signaling molecules, and the results of the present study indicate DEPs after knockdown of FoxO3a are involved in the amino acid transport pathway and mainly serve a role in the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathway (
Fig. 10
). In conclusion, knocking down FoxO3a inhibits drug-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells and alters expression levels of proteins in the protein digestion and absorption signaling pathways.