Introduction
The widespread use of chemicals in everyday
life significantly
exposes humans and the environment, posing potential risks to human
health and ecosystems.
Dedicated target
analysis approaches cannot cover only the variety of chemical contaminants
and their transformation products. Thus, screening methods based on
liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry
(LC-HRMS) are required. In target screening using high-resolution
mass spectrometry (HRMS), high numbers of preselected compounds are
analyzed simultaneously, requiring in-house availability of reference
standards. Suspect screening allows for a broadening of the scope
of analysis by addressing compounds without reference standards, but
relying on their expected mass-to-charge ratio (
m
/
z
), isotope pattern, and other parameters that
are received from another laboratory or predicted.
In both target and suspect screening, false positives at
MS
1
level occur frequently in complex environmental and
biological matrices due to coeluting isomeric or isobaric compounds,
which form interfering ions, adducts, or in-source fragments.
In addition to that, interferences that mask
compounds of interest through high background levels may result in
false negatives, especially when only trace levels are present. Due
to an insufficient separation in the LC dimension, MS
2
spectra
may contain fragments from other compounds or stereoisomers within
the precursor isolation window, leading to decreased spectral matching
values
or difficulties in isotope pattern
evaluations, which are often needed for molecular formula annotations.
In recent years, ion mobility separation
(IMS) and, later, trapped
ion mobility separation (TIMS) have been introduced as an additional
separation dimension to HRMS.
While its
first applications started in proteomics,
it is increasingly used in recent years in small molecules analysis,
e.g., in lipidomics
,
and metabolomics
and has begun to reach the field of exposomics and environment,
−
for example, for PFAS analysis.
−
In TIMS, ions enter
the analyzer with an electrical field by drag of a gas flow, where
a gradual lowering of the electrical force leads to the elution of
ions according to their mobility in the gas phase.
The collisional cross section (CCS) of the ion can be calculated
on the basis of its electrical field (1/K
0
) of elution.
Although CCS values cannot be directly calculated in TIMS without
calibration through established reference compounds with known CCS
values,
comparable and highly reproducible
CCS values are reported.
,
The advantages of TIMS
involve a high-resolution IMS (resolving power 200–400) combined
with avoiding a loss in sensitivity through the generation of two
trapping regions in the ion mobility cell, which results in simultaneous
trapping and analysis of ions. However, this only applies if the same
values are used for the accumulation and ramp times. Then, the benefit
of high-duty cycles can be achieved with only minimal loss of sensitivity.
Further implementations promote the improvement
of the MS
2
coverage by using parallel accumulation-serial
fragmentation (PASEF) through synchronization of the TIMS cell with
a fast quadrupole analyzer.
For
exposomics and other small-molecule science applications, the
overall benefits of IMS rely on the assumption that (1) the analytes
of interest, as well as the sample matrix, show a sufficient diversity
in CCS values and (2) sufficient separation can be achieved by current-state
IMS technology. Therefore, we evaluated a set of more than 769 chemicals
of interest in the field of exposomics, if an additional ion mobility
separation allowed for a potential avoidance of interfering ions in
different sample matrices. Additionally, we also assessed the performance
of the method performance with regard to MS
2
spectra quality
and MS
2
coverage and evaluated the influence of different
TIMS parameters.
Materials and Methods
Sample Preparation
We used pooled urine, sheep serum,
breastmilk, house dust, and wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) influent,
as often used in the context of wastewater-based epidemiology, as
exemplary sample matrices to evaluate the performance of the TIMS
separation. A detailed description of the sample preparation is given
in
Table S1
. All samples were spiked before
analysis with the same internal standard mixture of 40 labeled compounds
(see
Table SX2
). After sample extraction,
aliquots of each sample matrix were spiked to reveal replicates with
two different concentration levels (10 and 100 ng/mL concentration
in the sample extract) of a reference mixture containing compounds
relevant for exposomic analysis (see
Table SX1
for a list of all compounds). Higher levels were used for dust samples,
where 50 and 500 ng/mL were spiked, as higher matrix effects and analyte
concentrations were expected. At the beginning and end of the measurement
sequence, the sole reference mixtures (concentrations 0.5, 1, 5, 10,
500 ng/mL) were measured in addition to the solvent blanks spread
over the sequence.
LC-TIMS-HRMS Measurements
Samples were measured with
reversed phase liquid chromatography (for more details, see
Table S2
) coupled to a TimsTof Pro 2 (Bruker,
Bremen, Germany) in positive and negative ionization mode using a
VIP-HESI source (source parameters see
Table S3
). Further applications of instrument and calibration parameters
are summarized in
Table S4
. The inverse
reduced mobility (1/
K
0
) values were measured
with trapped ion mobility in a range of 0.45–1.45 V*s/cm
2
with a ramp and accumulation time of 100 ms and nitrogen
as carrier gas. The instrument set the TIMS cartridge tunnel pressure
to 2.64 mbar/0.768 mbar (in/out). The ion charge control (ICC) was
activated to reduce the TIMS tunnel saturation and the effects of
the space charge effects, with a limit of 7.5 × 10
6
for the number of charges in the TIMS cell.
For calibration,
20 μL of a 1:1 mixture (v/v) of Agilent ESI-Low Concentration
Tune Mix and sodium formate buffer solution (10 mM) was injected through
a 6-port valve with a sample loop injected before each analysis. The
ion mobility using nitrogen gas was recalibrated using the masses
of the Agilent tune mix (
N
= 6) and the values of
the “CCS compendium” comprising the CCS values calculated
by Stow et al.,
while the mass accuracy
was calibrated using the calculated masses of the sodium formate clusters
(
N
= 12). Data-dependent MS
2
spectra (dd-MS
2
were acquired with PASEF
using
a cycle time of 0.53 s for two MS
2
ramps. The isolation
window was set to 1
m
/
z
, employing
a combined collision energy of 20 and 50 eV. The selection of precursors
was carried out with an active exclusion for 0.1 min. All samples
in spiked and native form were injected as duplicates, measured with
TIMS separation and additionally with switched-off ion mobility (detailed
parameters, see
Table S5
). In addition,
a replica of urine samples (spiked and native) was also measured with
three different ramp times (100, 200, 300 ms).
Raw data (as
Bruker *.d files) have been deposited to the EMBL-EBI
MetaboLights database
with the identifier
MTBLS11753 and are accessible directly at
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/MTBLS11753
.
Data Processing
The manual evaluation and extraction
of the target compounds was performed in TASQ version 2024b (Bruker,
Bremen, Germany), with all parameters for the extraction and annotation
of the analytes summarized in
Table S6
.
Data processing steps included automatic mass and ion mobility recalibration,
generation of extracted ion chromatograms (EICs), extracted ion mobilograms
(EIMs), and CCS calculation based on the measured 1/
K
0
values. To achieve an automated open source extraction
of EIC and EIM, the Python package AlphaTims
was used. The Python script for data evaluation is available on
GitHub (
https://github.com/chufz/timstofscreener
). An additional evaluation of the raw data from the different sample
matrices was performed using the raw data overview and heatmap graphs
in MZmine (version 4.1.0).
True
annotations were defined within a
m
/
z
window of 5 ppm, ΔRT of 0.25 min, and a ΔCCS of less
than 3%. To differentiate any additional peak that occurs in the EIM
as interference, we define a ΔCCS of >5% as boundary.
Metaboscape version 2024b (Bruker) was used to generate a feature
list that included an ion deconvolution step of all native matrices
and to perform a spectral library search. The applied workflow and
parameters are summarized in
Table S7
.
For annotation of the spiked compounds, the tandem mass spectral library
of NIST 2020 and MassBank EU (version 06–24) were used. All
features that showed a higher mean abundance in the blank sample were
removed. The overall measurement performance was evaluated using the
Bruker RealTimeQC module (see
Figures S1 and S2
). Further structure elucidation of the interferences was performed
using MetFrag
and CCSBase
to predict the CCS values of the candidates.
Results and Discussion
CCS Database Generation for Reference Analytes
A screening
database, comprising CCS and RT values, was generated for the analytes
of the reference standard mixture and used for a screening workflow
on the spiked and nonspiked matrices. In total, we could detect 769
unique environmental contaminants, for which 594 single charged ions
were annotated in ESI+ and 354 single charged ions in ESI- (see
Table SX1
). The reported values are averaged
over five injections of the reference mixture at different concentrations.
Some small overlap of compounds with previously reported CCS values
were found. We achieved a mean difference of 0.63% to Belova et al.
(
N
= 39) and 0.99% for Celma
et al.
(
N
= 126), see
Table SX6
. The intrabatch stability of CCS was
assessed over the spiked internal standards (see
Figures S1,S2
and
Table SX2
). The
mean of all internal standards for the measured ΔCCS was 0.33%
for the solvent mixtures and 0.31% for all sample matrices. This indicates
that there are no influences introduced by the sample matrix on the
TIMS stability.
For 94 chromatographic peaks of the analytes
in ESI+ and 60 in ESI- mode, more than one peak was observed in the
EIM, and the extracted dd-MS
2
-PASEF spectra for the integrated
mobility range revealed a match to the analyte for all peaks (see
Table SX1
and
Figure S3
for all additional CCS values). The same pattern of peaks was also
observed in all solvent mixtures and in the spiked matrices. Several
reasons explain the assignment of several peaks in the EIM to one
analyte, such as coeluting isomers of the substance, but also different
ionization sites (protomers), solvent-analyte clusters,
or dimerization effects. For further analysis
of the spiked matrices, only one peak was determined as a characteristic
peak for each compound and added to the database to simplify the annotation
procedure. However, additional CCS values are also reported separately.
The selection was based on the lowest CCS value and if an R
2
> 0.8 for the signal response over the solvent calibration was
observed.
For the evaluation of interfering ions, any additional CCS values
identified were disregarded. However, we want to note that the selected
EIM signals with the lowest 1/K
0
were not always associated
with a higher abundance than the disregarded peaks, especially for
the measurements of the highest reference mixture concentration.
Dimerization was previously postulated for fluorinated compounds.
,
The formation of single-charged dimers from the VIP-HESI source
may lead to a different necessary trapping time in the TIMS cell,
but separation into monomers or other rearrangements appears before
the analyzer, which leads to signals with the same
m
/
z
as that of a monomer. We evaluated the signal
abundance of the peaks in the EIM in correlation with the concentration
(see
Figure S4
for one example), as any
formation of dimers during the ionization should be concentration
dependent. We compared the signal responses of both peaks to hypothesize
the potential of the monomer (lower CCS) and dimer (higher CCS) as
a function of the concentration.
All final CCS values (assigned
to the potential monomer) are displayed
in correlation with their
m
/
z
value
in
Figure
for each
ionization mode. As previously reported,
most compounds are located near a trendline, as CCS in general increases
with molecular mass. A lower CCS for a given
m
/
z
can be observed for [M-H]
−
ions of polyhalogenated
compounds, among them mainly per- and polyfluorinated acids, which
have already been reported as a promising approach for nontarget screening
applications for unknown PFAS.
Furthermore,
lower CCS to
m
/
z
ratios are found
for iodine-containing X-ray contrast agents with high molecular masses,
such as diatrizoate, iohexol, iopromide, iopamidol, and iomeprol,
but also brominated compounds, such as hexabromo-cyclododecane, tetrabromobisphenol
A, and 2,4,6-tribromophenol. Even compounds with a lower carbon/halogen
ratio, such as fipronil and its transformation products (desulfinyl,
sulfone, and sulfide), tritosulfuron, and sucralose, are observed
below the general trendline.
1
Distribution of the CCS vs
m
/
z
plot for the database of CCS values for 769 compounds,
including
594 ions in ESI+ and 354 ions in ESI-. If the compound contains one
of the heteroatoms F, Br, P, Cl, I, or S, the point is marked by that
color. Compounds that contain only C, H, N, and O are kept in black.
Accurate discrimination between highly similar
isomers, such as
those differing only by the position of a single functional group,
is critical for ion mobility separation. If a separation is achieved,
it will depend on (i) the resolving power of the ion mobility (IM)
spectrometer and (ii) the reproducibility of collision cross section
(CCS) values within the analytical matrix. Some examples observed
in the reference mixture are simazine (CCS = 142.98 Å
2
, RT = 11.98 min) and desethyl-tebuthylazine (CCS = 144.23 Å
2
, RT = 11.98 min), or isomers such as 1,7-diaminophenazine
(CCS = 143.60 Å
2
, RT = 8.40 min) and 2,8-diaminophenazine
(CCS = 143.53 Å
2
, RT = 8.22 min), where a separation
in the IMS was not possible. For a separation of these analytes of
interest from potential interferences originating from the sample
matrices, we assume enough structural differences that a sufficient
separation should be achieved.
The number of analytes detected
in the solvent was compared for
three different concentrations between TIMS switched on and off (see
Figure S5
). For high concentrations (500 ng/mL),
no significant differences were observed. For lower concentrations,
we observed differences between the ion modes. While in positive mode,
a higher number of analytes could be detected with TIMS separation,
a lower number could be detected in negative mode. Several factors
impact the sensitivity, such as a decreased signal-to-noise ratio
when the TIMS separation is used, as interfering ions are separated.
A loss of sensitivity can be avoided by a full-duty cycle by equal
accumulation and ramp times. Although this might be the ideal case,
applying an ion charge control with complex matrices, the actual accumulation
times during the measurement might be lower (see
Figure S6
as an example for WWTP influent). For these cases,
the instrument will set a lower accumulation time than ramp time,
leading to a difference in sensitivity for the TIMS measurements.
Sample Matrix Characterization
For further evaluation,
we assume that the complexity of the matrix increases with an increasing
number of detected nontarget features in each sample, resulting in
an order of breastmilk < serum < dust < urine < WWTP influent
(see
Figure
). When
plotting the nontarget feature list containing all types of ions for
the different sample matrices as CCS against the
m
/
z
values, we observe three clearly distinguishable
feature groups along trendlines. As previously reported,
these are mainly related to three different
charge states, with higher CCS values for double-charged (“middle”
CCS range of 300–500 Å
2
) and for triple-charged
ions ("upper" CCS range 500–700 Å
2
), which
particularly occur in positive ionization mode. Wastewater, for example,
contains a large number of polyethylene glycols, which can form multiple
charge states in ESI+ through their large number of ether bonds, forming
homologue series spaced by 44 Da. Multiple charged ions found for
breast milk are potentially represented by the large number of oligosaccharides.
Furthermore, the feature list is also affected by the selected sample
preparation method, such as lipid removal for breastmilk, protein
precipitation for serum, liquid extraction for dust, and solid phase
extraction for urine and wastewater influent. When aligning the features
between the matrices, the highest number of similar features was found
between the wastewater influent and urine (
N
= 2,679
for both modes of ions), followed by the WWTP influent and dust (
N
= 2,061, see Venn diagram in
Figure S7
).
2
CCS vs
m
/
z
plot of the feature
table for different native sample matrices after blank correction,
measured in negative (blue) and positive (red) ionization modes, including
all different charge states. The number of features (
n
) is given for both ionization modes.
Evaluation of Potential False-Positive Annotations in Screening
Applications
The overall separation performance between the
analytes from the matrix background is achieved through a high orthogonality
between the separation in the dimensions of chromatographic and ion
mobility
(see
Figure S8
). The reverse phase LC method used in this study is quite
typical for screening applications
(C18
column and acidic eluent in ESI+/basic eluent in ESI-) and was therefore
used to evaluate the additional benefit of the TIMS dimension on the
overall separation efficiency.
We evaluated the number of annotations
based on the
m
/
z
of the expected
ion (window of 5 ppm) and RT (window of ±0.25 min) in the EIC,
where a different peak is present in the extracted mobilogram (EIM),
but with a different MS
2
spectra. The five different native
sample matrices were taken as exemplary sample backgrounds (
Figure
) for all analytes
(see
Figure
). The
EIM of the integrated chromatographic peak of all ions of the analytes
(
N
= 948) was compared with the EIM of the pure solvent
reference standards measurements for additional peaks that appear
only in the sample matrices. To be conservative for potential shifts,
we applied a CCS threshold of >5% to associate the EIM peak as
a distinct
peak from the values obtained in the solvent standard.
Figure
(A+B) shows two prototypic
examples appearing, either as coeluting interference or false positive
annotation, depending on whether the analyte is also abundant in the
sample (see also
Table SX3
). The absolute
numbers underlying the bar plots are given in
Table S8
.
3
(A) Examples and numbers of possible analytes as false
positive
annotations through the sample matrix that were separated by TIMS.
EIM and EIC of the pooled urine matrix (blue) in comparison to the
measured reference standard (red); (B) example of an analyte with
an interference that could be separated by TIMS and the numbers of
occurrences in each native matrix; (C) bar graphs summarizing the
number of true annotations revealed without any observed interference
for comparison.
In the absence of the true analyte, coeluting interference
would
result in a false positive annotation without ion mobility. An example
of this case is the detection of the mutagenic and cancerogenic compound
2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo­[4,5-
f
]­quinoxalin (MeIQx)
in the pooled urine sample (see the example in
Figure
A). The EIC for the native urine sample and
the reference standard only shows a small ΔRT of 0.04 min, while
the EIM shows a different peak with a calculated CCS difference of
29%. When comparing the MS
2
spectra, no spectral similarity
was observed, leading to the conclusion that the peak in the EIC is
resolved from a different compound (see
Figure S9
).
With the presence of the analyte in the sample and
no separation
through IMS, interference might alter the corresponding isotope pattern
and MS
2
spectrum, leading to a false negative or inconclusive
annotation. An example of this case is the detection of the carboxylic
acid metabolite diethyltoluamide (DEET) in the pooled urine sample
(see
Figure
B). The
EIC for the native urine sample and the reference standard shows a
ΔRT of 0.13 min, while the EIM shows next to a matching peak
a different peak with a calculated CCS difference of 14%. When comparing
the MS
2
spectra extracted for different mobility ranges,
no spectral similarity was observed, leading to the conclusion that
two different compounds are coeluting in the chromatography.
For both cases (
Figure
A,B), the annotation performance in the positive ion mode
is more affected by the matrix interference than in the negative ion
mode. For all matrices combined, a total of 112 peaks with different
mobility values to the reference standard were found, with 36 peaks
assigned as false positive annotations and 76 cases of interference
to an existing true annotation of an analyte.
For the detection
of 4-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-butan-2-one in urine,
a small RT shift (ΔRT = 0.15 min) allowed us to identify the
separated interference of a structural isomer by spectral library
matching. Here, more evidence is given in the EIM, with a calculated
CCS deviation of 32% (see
Figure S10A
).
The detection of 4-hydroxyquinoline in urine exemplifies cases where
several potential structural isomers might not be clearly identified
by MS
2
, as all possess a low fragmentation efficiency at
the collision energies used and likely rather similar fragmentation
spectra. In these cases, only minor changes in EIC (ΔRT = −0.12
min) can raise suspicion, but the additional peak in the EIM (ΔCCS
= 14%) provides evidence that another structural isomer is also present
(see
Figure S10B
). In the majority cases,
however, structure elucidation of the interference remains difficult,
as not only one precise underlying chemical composition can be identified
but rather a high background noise. One of these cases represents
the annotation of cotinine in sheep serum (see
Figure S10C
). This is especially the case for compounds exhibiting
a poor chromatographic peak shape.
In addition,
Figure
C summarizes the general annotations
(
N
= 472) achieved
for the unspiked matrices (see
Table SX4
), for which a mean
m
/
z
error of
1.04 ppm, an RT error of 0.03 min and a CCS deviation of 0.6% was
observed. The high number of Schymanski level 1 annotations (confirmed
by MS
2
spectra)
versus level
4 annotations (no MS
2
coverage or poor matching due to
low intensity), which can be observed in
Figure
C for native samples, highlights the benefits
of high spectral coverage of this acquisition method (see further
evaluations in
Evaluation of dd-MS2-PASEF Spectra
Quality and Coverage
). The number of false positives (
Figure
A) identified by
TIMS did not exceed more than ten for each matrix, which accounts
for ∼ 1% of the total number of evaluated ions. For most interferences,
poor isotope pattern matching and a high
m
/
z
or RT deviation close to the maximum acceptable limit
(RT ±0.25 min and
m
/
z
error
of ±5 ppm) also provided some insights that the annotation might
not be accurate.
For 30% of the additional peaks in the EIM,
a ppm value >2.5 ppm
was observed. Therefore, a high fraction of interferences separated
by TIMS might be isobaric compounds or background noise rather than
structural isomers. The number of annotations that show a sufficient
separation of interference with TIMS (
Figure
B) represents 14% of the confirmed annotations
achieved (Schymanski level 1) in all matrices, with the highest fraction
observed for urine (54%). This suggests that the benefits of TIMS
are more on the side of avoiding false negatives or inconclusive assignments
than on actual false positives when taking into account a workflow
that includes MS
2
as follow-up step for confirmation.
The evaluation described above was conducted on a set of target
compounds, but a potential suspect screening workflow was assessed.
With regard to suspect screening applications, the applied values
for will, however, rely on predicted CCS and RT values or databases
generated from measurements by different instruments. We compared
the predicted CCS values with our experimental values for a prediction
model, CCSBase.
A comparison of predicted
CCS
[M+H]+
with our experimental values showed an R
2
of 0.95, with an RMSE of 7.27 Å
2
(equals
4.2%, see also
Figure S11
).
Compared
to the mean deviation observed for the internal standards
(max. error of approximately 3% for all labeled compounds throughout
the sequence), we conclude that for suspect detection with predicted
CCS values, annotation windows of <5% can be applied. The observed
interferences mentioned above appeared with a mean deviation larger
than ±15 Å
2
to the analytes’ CCS values
(see
Table SX5
), concluding that these
applied CCS annotation windows will be sufficient for the separation
of interferences and barely influence the annotation performance.
However, we want to mention that this only accounts for a separation
of xenobiotic analytes from interfering compounds originating from
the sample matrix, which might show a considerable structural difference.
Any separation between isomers with closely related structures might
be more limited. Differences in the CCS values of structurally similar
compounds are assumed to be smaller than the prediction accuracy of
the model; therefore, a predicted CCS will not help in compound annotation.
This good prediction performance for CCS values stands in contrast
to RT predictions, where highly accurate prediction models are still
lacking.
A prediction model based on
the reference standards measured in positive ion mode generated with
RTPred
showed a prediction performance
with an R
2
of 0.65 for the data of this study, with an
MAE of 1.71 min (see also
Figure S12
).
This deficit results in the need for a broader annotation window in
suspect screening applications, and therefore in a higher probability
of false positive annotations. We reevaluated the data with a broader
RT window by a factor of 10. This increase in the RT window from ΔRT=
±0.25 min to ΔRT= ±2.5 min introduced an average of
16 false positive annotations in each sample matrix (2% of the total
number of analyte ions), with the highest number observed for dust
extraction (
N
= 27). A list of false-positive annotations
introduced through the larger RT window is summarized in
Table SX5
.
Evaluation of dd-MS
2
-PASEF Spectra Quality and Coverage
Achieving a high dd-MS
2
coverage during the measurement
is critical for screening applications, as structure elucidation or
confirmation relies on the presence of MS
2
information,
alongside with a high spectral quality. Several publications in proteomics
and lipidomics have already reported and evaluated the high advantage
of dd-MS
2
-PASEF accumulation in increasing spectral quality
and coverage.
,
As shown in
Figure
, the influence of the sample
matrix on spectral coverage increases with matrix complexity, resulting
in lower spectral coverage. Additionally, the spectral quality decreases,
leading to decreased spectral matching scores, especially for low-level
spiked samples. We observed a spectral library search annotation coverage
of 64–93% (100 ng/mL) and 32–84% (10 ng/mL) in the spiked
matrices compared to the solvent mixture at the same concentration.
4
Dependency
of the MS
2
spectral coverage (top) and distribution
of the spectral matching score against the NIST and MassBank library
(bottom) on the analyte concentration and background matrix. The results
include both ionization modes. The distributions of spectral matching
scores of all annotations found for both spiking levels are displayed
as violin plots with annotated mean (black) and median (red).
We evaluated the spectral quality based on the
matching scores
achieved for a spectral library matching. The violin plots in
Figure
compare the distribution
of scores obtained for the spectral matching at two different spiking
levels. For comparability of the matching scores achieved against
the spectral library, only the overlap of annotations achieved in
both spiking levels are shown. Generally, lower scores are observed
for complex matrices like wastewater and urine, with a further decrease
in the mean match scores achieved for lower spiking levels, which
can be explained by interfering ions in the precursor window, leading
to decreased spectral quality and lower scores. Comparison of spectral
quality to switched-off TIMS measurements remains difficult, as several
other parameters influencing the results, such as the applied precursor
target intensity, which cannot be easily kept comparable among both
acquisition modes. However, for two analytes with observed interferences
in the urine matrix, which were only poorly separated with a ramp
time of 100 ms, we could achieve an increase in spectral quality through
better separation with higher TIMS resolution by increasing the ramp
time to 300 ms (see
Figures S13 and S14
).
Conclusions
The annotation of suspects or targets in
HRMS
1
data
for complex biological sample matrices requires caution, as the analytes
of interest are merely a needle in the haystack of the sample matrix.
The number of chromatographic interferences that were separated through
TIMS (
N
= 112) for all observed analytes (
N
= 769) in five matrices indicates the probability of how
often false positive MS
1
tentative annotations will occur
in exposomic screening applications, if they would only rely on an
MS
1
annotation with
m
/
z
and RT but no further MS
2
confirmation. Our exemplary
study demonstrated the benefits of ion mobility separation for the
annotation and structural identification of contaminants in complex
matrices.
Especially when the applied screening workflow relies
on predicted
RT values, broader annotation windows are necessary to account for
prediction inaccuracies, further increasing the number of inaccurate
tentative annotations. When additionally CCS windows are applied for
annotation, a higher specificity is achieved by separating isomeric
and isobaric compounds that fall into the same RT window as the intended
suspects.
However, using TIMS and predicted CCS values does
not replace sufficient
upstream chromatographic separation, as well as all other classical
identification criteria, such as MS
2
spectra comparison
and isotope pattern analysis. However, the applicability of these
identification criteria is limited. Especially due to the requirement
for a sufficient abundance, which is not always achievable, especially
when analyzing low-level contaminants. Therefore, robust and effective
screening applications should combine all evidence for an annotation
provided by mass spectrometry. Here, ion mobility can serve as one
contributing factor for revealing high-confidence annotations and
improving the overall annotation performance. To obtain a large number
of samples and suspects, these confirmation steps should be automatically
evaluated and integrated in a user-friendly manner.
To conclude,
our observations highlight the benefits for exposomics
of high-resolution IMS separation in combination with a high MS
2
spectra coverage. However, other ion mobility techniques,
such as traveling wave ion mobility (TWIMS) when applied with Structures
for Lossless Ion Manipulations (SLIM) or cyclic ion mobility (cIMS),
have also shown high resolution ion mobility.
Supplementary Material