INTRODUCTION
Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), previously known as non-alcoholic liver disease (NAFLD), is the most common chronic liver disease and is estimated to affect over a billion people worldwide.
1
Recent evidence from the United States’ United Network of Organ Sharing (UNOS) also indicated MASLD as the second indication for all liver transplants and is rapidly becoming the top indication for liver transplant among those who are listed for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
2
3
This substantial increase is driven by the pandemic of metabolic dysfunctions, including obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
4
5
6
The presence of such risk factors may accelerate the disease progression, leading to a continuous rise in MASLD-related mortality.
7
In addition, older age, male sex, and Latino/Latina ethnicity are also associated with the severity of MASLD progression.
8
9
The new nomination of MASLD emphasized the presence of at least 1 of 5 cardiometabolic risk factors along with the steatosis in hepatocytes.
10
Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is the progressive form of MASLD, histologically characterized by lobular inflammation and ballooning, which may further progress to cirrhosis and eventually HCC.
11
The histological characteristics and risk factors of MASLD progression are shown in Figure
1
. MASLD tends to be the fastest-growing cause of HCC according to studies from the USA, Europe, South Korea, and Southeast Asia.
12
13
14
15
16
However, ~36.6%–54.0% of MASLD-HCC patients displayed the absence of cirrhosis, contributing to the great challenges for early diagnosis and clinical management.
17
FIGURE 1
Histological characteristics and risk factors of MASLD progression. MASLD progression is a gradual process under various risk factors. Simple steatosis in MASLD stage and early-stage MASH are reversible, while the advanced stage of cirrhosis and MASLD-HCC is non-reversible. Abbreviations: MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Although liver biopsy is acknowledged as the gold standard for MASLD diagnosis and staging, this invasive method is not suitable for early-stage patients, with the risk of bleeding and pain.
18
Instead, non-invasive diagnostic strategies with high reliability and accuracy are of urgent need to monitor and predict the exacerbated risks for MASLD patients. Meanwhile, therapeutic approaches against MASLD patients at different stages vary a lot, due to the complexity of the pathogenesis. Fortunately, the FDA has now approved Resmetirom as a specific drug for MASH treatment. In this article, we summarize current advancements on surveillance and treatment strategies for MASLD and MASLD-HCC patients, highlighting available options during clinical management.
EARLY DETECTION OF MASLD AND ITS RELATED HCC
Different from viral-associated HCC, early signs of MASLD-HCC are often neglected during routine surveillance, which usually leads to the diagnosis of advanced stages.
19
20
Consequently, improvements to early detection for MASLD patients at risk of progression to HCC are of urgent need to reduce HCC-related mortality. Here, we summarized several non-invasive strategies for MASLD/MASLD-HCC detection (Figure
2
).
FIGURE 2
Non-invasive methods in the detection of early or advanced stages of MASLD patients. Current application of non-invasive strategies for MASLD patients includes imaging methods, a scoring system based on serum tests, as well as several promising new approaches. Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; CAP, controlled attenuation parameter; LSM, liver stiffness measurement; MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease; MRE, magnetic resonance elastography; MRI-PDFF, magnetic resonance imaging proton density fat fraction; SWE, shear wave elastography; VCTE, vibration-controlled transient elastography.
Risk estimation
Presence of cirrhosis resulting from any etiology is the key index for HCC surveillance.
8
21
22
According to cost-effectiveness considerations, HCC surveillance is necessary and reasonable when the annual incidence of HCC exceeds 0.8% in patients with compensated cirrhosis and 0.2% in those without cirrhosis.
23
24
Data showed that the annual incidence of MASLD-HCC ranged from 0.7% to 2.6% in patients developing cirrhosis, which is justifiable for HCC screening.
25
The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) guideline recommended the particular HCC surveillance in MASLD-related cirrhotic patients.
25
In the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) clinical practice, HCC surveillance is also suggested in MASLD patients with progressed fibrosis or cirrhosis, but not considered for patients with F0–F2 fibrosis stages.
26
Notably, the risk of liver-related mortality was found to be increased with fibrosis stage (from F1 to F4) in MASLD patients.
27
Indeed, whether MASLD patients without cirrhosis can benefit from systematic HCC surveillance is under debate. Although MASLD tends to be the leading etiology of the non-cirrhotic HCC, the annual incidence of HCC among this subgroup is quite low.
19
20
28
29
The Veterans Affairs administrative database provided that the annual HCC incidence of non-cirrhotic MASLD was only 0.008 per 100 person-years, parallel to a prospective multicenter study involving 1773 MASLD patients and found that only 0.04% person-years of patients with F0–F2 fibrosis would progress into HCC.
30
Based on the present evidence, systematic screening for non-cirrhotic MASLD-HCC is far below the cost-effectiveness threshold and might not be prudent.
Imaging diagnosis
A brief summary of imaging methods for MASLD diagnosis is shown in Table
1
.
TABLE 1
Imaging methods for MASLD diagnosis
Method
Applicable stages
Advantages
Limitations
B-mode ultrasound
Steatosis
Convenience, low cost
Non-quantifiable, poor visualization in obese individuals
VCTE
Steatosis, fibrosis, cirrhosis
Quantifiable, low cost
Affected by obesity
pSWE/2D-SWE
Fibrosis, cirrhosis
Quantifiable, visualization of liver tissues
Affected by obesity
MRI-PDFF
Steatosis
Quantifiable, high accuracy/ reproducibility/sensitivity
High cost, complex operations
MRE
Fibrosis, cirrhosis
Quantifiable, resistant to obesity, and high accuracy
High cost, complex operations
Abbreviations: 2D-SWE, two-dimensional shear wave elastography; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease; MRE, magnetic resonance elastography; MRI-PDFF, magnetic resonance imaging proton density fat fraction; pSWE, point shear wave elastography; VCTE, vibration-controlled transient elastography.
Ultrasonics
The conventional B-mode ultrasound is acknowledged as the first-line method for steatosis screening because of its convenience and low cost. Recent evidence showed that the accuracy for the detection of ≥5% histologically defined steatosis was significantly higher than that of a decade ago.
31
32
For moderate to severe hepatic steatosis, a meta-analysis indicated that the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasonography were 84.8% and 93.6%, respectively.
31
However, ultrasonic diagnosis is highly dependent on the examiner, and the steatosis areas cannot be accurately quantified. To this end, the hepatorenal index (HRI) was designed as a semiquantitative measurement, in which the hepatic B-mode signal intensity is divided by the renal cortical signal intensity at the same depth.
33
This method can partially eliminate confounding parameters by using the renal cortex as the internal control, but is also affected by some other factors, including liver fibrosis and renal diseases, which may confound the correlation between the HRI value and hepatic steatosis.
34
35
36
For MASLD patients at high risk of HCC progression, regular surveillance with ultrasound is highly necessary and readily achievable. It is recommended by both AASLD and AGA guidelines that ultrasonic examination should be taken every 6 months among the high-risk groups.
26
37
38
Nevertheless, the early detection of MASLD-HCC in clinical practice remains at a low rate. The reason accounting for the suboptimal performance of ultrasonography would be that the majority of MASLD patients are accompanied by obesity, which contributes to a low imaging quality as the ultrasound beam attenuates through the thick layer of subcutaneous fat.
39
40
Such poor visualization among obese individuals was found to persist over time.
41
Overall, these data suggest that the clinical application of conventional ultrasonography is limited by its low sensitivity in early detection due to obesity-related factors for MASLD-HCC.
Elastography
Recently, vibration-controlled transient elastography (VCTE) has become one of the most widely used elastography methods. The liver fat content can be quantitatively assessed based on the attenuation of the ultrasound beam, named as controlled attenuation parameter (CAP).
42
VCTE also emerged as a critical tool in estimating liver fibrosis, by measuring the velocity of low-frequency ultrasound-based vibrations to generate a liver stiffness measurement (LSM).
43
44
The receiver operating curve (AUROC) of VCTE in detecting advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis is 0.80 and 0.90, respectively.
44
Such superior accuracy indicated its close correlation with adverse clinical outcomes, which is also recommended by several guidelines to utilize VCTE as the risk stratification tool.
45
MASLD patients with biopsy-proven bridging fibrosis displayed a baseline VCTE LSM of 16.6 kPa or greater, and progression to cirrhosis would increase by at least 20% in VCTE LSM.
46
However, the accuracy of VCTE will also be interfered with by obesity, as well as other confounding factors, including active alcohol intake, recent food consumption, hepatic congestion, and active hepatitis.
47
Point shear wave elastography (pSWE) and 2-dimensional shear wave elastography (2D-SWE) are other 2 ultrasound-based elastography strategies. Different from VCTE, these 2 methods utilize an acoustic radiation force impulse to induce shear waves in liver tissue, which enables the visualization of the liver tissue and select a region without blood vessels, rib shadows, or bile ducts.
48
49
2D-SWE generates acoustic energy to multiple sites in the liver, thus offering significantly larger areas than VCTE and pSWE.
50
Although high diagnostic efficacy in staging MASLD-related fibrosis of pSWE has been observed, its performance was also reported to be affected by obesity, narrow intercostal spaces, and acute inflammation, but not affected by ascites.
47
51
52
53
Evidence of diagnostic efficacy of 2D-SWE is quite limited and needs further investigation.
MRI-PDFF
In addition to conventional ultrasonography and VCTE, magnetic resonance imaging proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF) offers a more accurate way to quantify hepatic steatosis by calculating the fraction of MRI-visible protons bound to fat as divided by all protons in the liver.
54
This method exhibits excellent performance in terms of its high validity, reliability, and sensitivity. More than one study demonstrated the strong correlation between MRI-PDFF and histological data.
55
56
57
58
Furthermore, in contrast to the spatial variability of steatosis that may happen during liver biopsies, MRI-PDFF can deliver effective and precise examination for each hepatic segment and lobe, suggesting a robust reproducibility of both intra-examination and inter-examination.
59
Besides, a prospective trial revealed that MRI-PDFF captured mild changes in MASLD patients after treatment over time, while no difference was observed through histological analysis of liver biopsies.
60
Nevertheless, the ability of MRI-PDFF to identify MASH patients from MASLD remained unsatisfactory, as the lipid content was not well correlated with hepatic inflammation and fibrosis.
61
62
63
This indicated that the clinical values of such superior precision in quantifying hepatic steatosis seemed to be limited, accompanied by the high cost and complexity of operation.
Magnetic resonance elastography
Another effective measurement of liver fibrosis is magnetic resonance elastography (MRE). During MRE testing, slight mechanical vibrations (between 30 and 70 Hz) are transmitted to the liver through an external device placed on the abdominal wall.
64
The dynamic propagation of vibration waves within the liver is captured by MRI, thus reconstructing the structure and elasticity of the tissue based on the appearance of the vibrational waves.
65
Such an imaging modality results in its resistance to the interference of obesity.
66
67
Moreover, MRE was found to deliver higher accuracy in fibrosis detection than VCTE under the same confounding factors. Data showed that among 142 biopsy-proven MASLD patients, the AUROC in identification of stage 2 or higher fibrosis in VCTE is 0.82, as compared with 0.91 for MRE.
68
It was also proven to have excellent performance in diagnosing advanced fibrosis with the AUROC of 0.92 among 117 biopsy-proven MASLD patients.
69
However, the application of MRE is limited due to the high cost and time-consuming nature of measurement. Both specialized hardware and software, besides a standard MRI instrument, are required.
Non-invasive biomarkers
In addition to the evaluation given by imaging and histological examination, various scoring systems regarding fibrotic severity have been developed in recent years. Here, we highlighted several scoring methods that are commonly used, based on either serum tests or imaging data (Table
2
).
TABLE 2
Scoring systems for MASLD diagnosis
Scoring system
Components
Application
FIB-4
Age, AST, ALT, platelet count
Fibrosis assessment
ELF
Serum hyaluronic acid, pro-collagen III, and TIMP1
Fibrosis assessment
FAST
LSM, CAP, AST
Identification of at-risk MASH
N3-MASH
Serum CXCL10 and CK-18, adjusted BMI
Early detection of MASH out of MASLD patients
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CAP, controlled attenuation parameter; ELF, Enhanced Liver Fibrosis; FAST, FibroScan-AST; FIB-4, Fibrosis-4; LSM, liver stiffness measurement; MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease.
Fibrosis-4 score
Fibrosis-4 (FIB-4) score is one of the most classic and useful ways of assessing hepatic fibrosis, especially at late stages.
70
71
This system encompasses age, serum aminotransferase levels, and platelet count, which was reported to exhibit the best performance in detecting MASLD-related advanced fibrosis, as compared with other serum-based tests.
71
72
According to a real-world observational cohort study from Germany, which involved 29,999 MASLD patients, the FIB-4 index of 1.3 at baseline might be an independent predictor for the risks of MASLD-HCC progression within 5–10 years.
73
Similarly, Korean researchers pointed out a strong association with the development of HCC in 25,946 MASLD patients with the FIB-4 index ≥1.45.
74
However, such a predictive index of FIB-4 requires further validation. From another perspective, MASLD patients with persistently high levels of FIB-4 index were shown to have 57.7-fold higher risks of HCC incidence than any other subgroups, supported by a 3-year retrospective study.
75
EASL guidelines also recommended FIB-4 as the first step for fibrosis screening in MASLD patients due to its convenience and low cost.
70
Of note, evaluation of cardiovascular disease should also be considered during the fibrosis assessment via the FIB-4 scoring system owing to its close correlation.
Enhanced Liver Fibrosis score
The Enhanced Liver Fibrosis (ELF) score was designed to examine hepatitis-induced fibrosis, which was recently utilized to evaluate fibrotic severity in MASH patients with compensatory cirrhosis.
76
77
It detects circulating markers derived from hepatic matrix turnover, including hyaluronic acid, pro-collagen III, and TIMP1.
78
ELF threshold <9.8 was demonstrated to exclude liver-related outcomes in the short term, while the threshold ≥11.3 exhibited a 5-fold rise in risks of HCC progression.
78
Moreover, a huge meta-analysis involving 2666 patients with MASLD also indicated a high negative predictive value (NPV) of ELF tests, especially at low-prevalence settings.
79
However, such high sensitivity of the test (>0.90) comes at the expense of limited specificity (0.30), which might bring about false-positive results. Importantly, a 2-step method combining FIB-4 and ELF significantly increased the 4.5-fold in diagnosing advanced liver fibrosis.
80
Another study also mentioned that such a combination contributed greatly to a reduced number of futile referrals.
81
FibroScan-AST score
The FibroScan-AST (FAST) score was recently proposed by a prospective study in 2020, specifically aiming to identify patients at risk of progressive MASH.
82
Although the staging for progressive MASH remains debatable, this predictive model combining LSM, CAP, and AST was designed to discriminate patients with elevated NAFLD activity score (NAS≥4) and advanced fibrosis (stage 2 or higher). Three hundred fifty patients with suspected MASLD from England were enrolled in a cross-sectional and multicenter study as the derivation cohort, the results of which were subsequently validated in histologically proven MASLD patients from 7 external independent cohorts. Excellent performance of this model was observed during both the derivation and validation stages, with a negative likelihood ratio of 0.2 (rule-out, cutoff) and a positive likelihood ratio of 5 (rule-in, cutoff). Meanwhile, a meta-analysis involving 12 observational studies with 5835 biopsy-confirmed MASLD patients from 2020 to 2022 also demonstrated superior predictive characteristics of the FAST score.
83
The negative predictive value and positive predictive value were found to be 92% and 65%, respectively. Indeed, this approach greatly contributed to effective screening of MASLD patients with progression risks at the clinical side, thus reducing unnecessary liver biopsies.
N3-MASH
A recent study provided fresh insights into the non-invasive diagnosis of MASH with a blood-based panel named N3-MASH.
84
This system, which consisted of CXCL10, CK-18, and adjusted BMI, showed a robust efficiency in identifying biopsy-confirmed MASH patients out of MASLD patients from Hong Kong with an AUROC of 0.823, which was further validated in 3 other different cohorts involving 516 subjects from San Diego, Wenzhou, and Hong Kong. While current non-invasive diagnostic strategies mainly focus on MASH-related fibrosis, N3-MASH is highly correlated with hepatic steatosis, lobular inflammation, and hepatocyte ballooning, indicating its huge potential in early detection. It was also suggested as a useful tool for prognosis evaluation. However, further research based on a larger scale is still needed before N3-MASH is implemented into clinical application.
AI-based diagnostic models
Over the past 2 decades, growing interest has been placed on artificial intelligence (AI) in contributing to the diagnostic improvements for MASLD-HCC patients. AI is a broad term with 2 major techniques included: classical machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL).
85
The operation of ML is based on “handcrafted features” defined by human investigators, while DL can automatically learn features due to more flexible parameters, which are more suited for processing complex data.
86
Multiple studies adopted these 2 methods together, in which features were extracted by a DL system and were subsequently combined with handcrafted features of ML approaches.
87
The application of AI in diagnosis is inseparable from imaging and histopathological data. Efforts have been made on MASLD-related fibrosis quantification with AI models. An automated convolutional neural network (CNN)-based method was applied to LSM and displayed high consistency with manual regions of interest (ROIs) analyzed by the MRE system.
88
In parallel, recent evidence indicated high diagnostic accuracy of ML combined with texture analysis in measuring liver fibrosis among 62 participants, based on T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI and MRE images.
89
Furthermore, AI models assist pathologists with a better understanding of the histological characteristics of MASLD patients to accurately stage the severity. For instance, Vanderbeck et al.
90
first applied a support vector machine algorithm equipped with handcrafted features in 2014 to detect and quantify macro steatosis in central veins, bile ducts, and other structures from MASLD and healthy liver biopsies, with an overall accuracy of 89%. A similar tool was also constructed by Vanderbeck et al.
91
to automatically classify and measure hepatic steatosis, with an overall accuracy of 89%. Of note, histological evaluation by AI models was shown to provide a strong correlation with the assessment from pathologists, suggesting the huge potential for AI models in quantification and standardization of MASLD-HCC diagnosis.
39
92
93
Emerging roles of omics in the diagnosis of MASLD
Genetics
A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) analyzed 1483 European MASLD patients, genetically matched with 17,781 controls. Besides, a replication cohort including 559 MASLD cases and 945 controls was also constructed for further confirmation.
94
Results identified a total of 4 related locations, among which PNPLA3 rs738409 showed the most significant predictive values as correlated with steatosis, NAS score, and fibrosis. It was also reported in other studies that carriage of the PNPLA3 rs738409 C > G single-nucleotide polymorphism poses a higher risk of HCC progression in MASLD patients without affecting the incidence of extrahepatic cancers.
74
95
Another potential gene is TM6SF2. Although carriage of TM6SF2 rs58542926 C > T minor allele was previously considered as a potential indicator of steatosis, MASH, and advanced fibrosis in patients with MASLD, the recent GWAS provides evidence of lower correlation of TM6SF2 with histological characteristics than that in PNPLA3.
94
Of note, intestinal deficiency of TM6SF2 was found to promoted MASH development in multiple mouse models mediated by gut microbiota; while hepatic TM6SF2 protected against MASLD-HCC by boosting cytotoxic CD8
+
T cells.
96
97
Furthermore, a genetic risk model combining variants of PNPLA3, TM6SF2, and HSD17B13 was utilized, which showed that a higher genetic risk score was associated with up to 12-fold higher risk of cirrhosis and 29-fold higher HCC risks in general populations.
98
Nevertheless, the application of genetic screening needs to consider the variation among various regions and races worldwide.
99
Proteomics
Albumin, aminotransferases, bilirubin, and coagulation factors are proteins commonly used in monitoring MASLD patients. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics provides new opportunities for large-scale screening of diagnostic biomarkers, which is also known as “liquid biopsy.”
100
SOMAscan is a promising new technology for sensitive and quantitative proteomic assays.
101
A recent retrospective study applying this platform identified 12 out of 97 differentially expressed serum proteins that can potently distinguish biopsy-proven early fibrosis and advanced fibrosis among MASLD patients.
102
Similarly, another cohort developed 4 proteomic-based panels to monitor simple steatosis, hepatocellular ballooning, inflammation, and fibrosis. This model was also found to effectively predict histological changes after therapeutic interventions.
103
Moreover, increasing efforts have been made to improve the prediction capacities of such models by integrating multiple omics techniques. Nevertheless, despite the huge potential, validation is still indispensable on a larger scale of populations.
Metabolomics
Metabolic dysfunction is the key factor driving the onset of MASLD. Improving understanding of the changes in lipid profiles during the disease progression may provide powerful insights. More than one study provided evidence on the diagnostic potential of metabolic markers at different MASLD stages. A set of 20 triglycerides was obtained by analyzing serum samples from 467 MASLD patients through metabolomics, showing a good performance in discriminating MASH from the early stage.
104
Meanwhile, 10 metabolites, including lipids, amino acids, and carbohydrates, were found to be closely correlated with advanced fibrosis in MASLD patients according to a cross-sectional study that enrolled 156 biopsy-confirmed patients.
105
Furthermore, researchers also observed the gradual changes in metabolic profiles during the progression from MASLD to HCC.
106
Hepatic metabolomic phenotype was significantly differentiated between MASLD-HCC with advanced fibrosis (F3 or F4) and MASLD-HCC with mild or no fibrosis (F0 or F1), mainly characterized by different concentrations of glucose, choline derivatives, phosphoethanolamine, monounsaturated fatty acids, and triglycerides.
107
Another predictive model consisting of 21 serum metabolites by multicenter research showed better performance among MASLD-HCC patients with the presence of cirrhosis.
108
Potential roles of microbiota and immune cells in the diagnosis of MASLD
Microbiota
Recent studies have established a strong link between gut microbial dysbiosis and the progression of MASLD, highlighting its potential for early detection in at-risk populations. The first metagenomic analysis of MASLD patients conducted in 2017 identified low abundance of
Ruminococcus obeum
and
Eubacterium rectale
in patients with MASLD-related fibrosis (stages 3–4) compared with those with MASH at stages 0–2.
109
This finding aligns with subsequent research in Europe.
110
Furthermore, commensal probiotics such as
Akkermansia
,
Bacillus
, and
Lactococcus
were found to be less abundant in MASLD-related cirrhosis, with
E. rectale
and
F. prausnitzii
emerging as promising biomarkers for predicting progression from simple steatosis to advanced fibrosis.
111
112
113
114
Based on these preclinical findings, detection tools utilizing microbial components are established. A prospective cohort of 86 patients from the USA has identified the stratifying capacities of a set of 37 fecal bacterial species between MASLD-related advanced fibrosis and MASH with robust accuracy (AUC 0.936).
109
For non-obese subjects,
Ruminococcaceae
and
Veillonellaceae
were found to be the main groups that associated with fibrosis severity, which were then validated in 3 MASLD mouse models.
115
In addition, another German cohort of 73 patients highlighted the detection potential of fungal species, especially in non-obese individuals of MASH patients.
116
In line, the fecal fungi dysbiosis was also observed in a Chinese cohort, indicating the correlation between fungal species and hepatic injuries in MASH patients.
117
All these data exhibited great potential of gut microbiome as the indicator of the disease, but further validation in a multicenter-based cohort is still needed.
Immune cells
The liver is constantly exposed to metabolites and antigens derived from the gut. The immune environment in the liver exhibited a tolerant state when at homeostasis, but will be triggered to an inappropriate immune response under the condition of metabolic disorders, such as MASLD/MASH. Persistent stimulation of hepatic inflammation is the key driver of the progression to malignancies. Recent data of single cell sequencing revealed major changes in MASH-associated macrophages (MAM) as characterized with high expression of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2).
118
Meanwhile, MAM was found to secrete a protein of GPNMB, which is located in the membrane and will be cleaved into circulation when activated, showing its ability as a biomarker for early detection of MASH.
118
Analysis on biopsy-proven MASLD patients with varied severity also demonstrated that macrophages were infiltrated at the early stage of steatosis, before advanced inflammation and fibrosis.
119
120
121
Indeed, a range of other immune cells, such as dendritic cells, natural killer cells, CD4
+
T cells, and CD8
+
T cells, were all reported to be associated with the transition from MASLD to MASH.
122
123
124
125
Given the complexity of immune response to metabolic changes and the challenges in detection approaches, more efforts should be made to explore the specific metabolites or proteins produced by immune cells during MASLD pathogenesis.
THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES
A summary of the current clinical management for MASLD/MASLD-HCC patients is shown in Figure
3
.
FIGURE 3
Clinical management for MASLD/MASLD-HCC patients. Major therapeutic options for reversible MASLD and MASH patients include improving lifestyles and FDA-approved drugs. The non-reversible stage of MASLD-HCC requires surgical management or systemic therapy. Abbreviations: FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease.
Improvements in lifestyles
Intermittent fasting
Growing evidence has shown that the timing of food consumption also plays an important role. One of the most popular types of intermittent fasting is time-restricted feeding (TRF), which restricts the timeframe of daily food intake to 6–8 hours.
126
Another mode called alternate day fasting (ADF) requires no intake of calories on the fasting day, while no restrictions on the eating day.
127
Similarly, the 5:2 diet is also involved with fasting, but only for 2 nonconsecutive days per week.
128
These newly proposed eating patterns have prompted new potential for therapeutic strategies for MASLD patients. Compared with calorie restriction diets or normal diets, randomized clinical trials demonstrated that intermittent fasting induced greater weight loss, characterized by a redistribution of the fat from the visceral to the subcutaneous.
129
130
Indeed, a long-term regimen of intermittent fasting may probably result in the regression of MASLD-related fibrosis, as it was previously shown to be associated with >10% decreased body weight.
131
Mechanistically, benefits brought by intermittent fasting were mediated by its regulation on metabolic flexibility, such as promoting ATP generation, suppressing inflammation and oxidative stress, thus affecting the MASLD pathogenesis.
132
133
134
Dietary modification
Dietary patterns consist of a complex combination of foods, nutrients, and beverages.
135
Research is trying to dig out the underlying correlations between what we habitually consume and the health outcomes. According to a recent systematic review, the Mediterranean diet tended to play a protective role for the European and American populations, while the Chinese Healthy Eating Index and the Cantonese Dietary Pattern may contribute to a lower risk of HCC in Asian countries.
136
Another analysis from 2 case–control studies also supported a lower risk of HCC among subjects with better adherence to the Mediterranean.
137
These results showed high consistency with the report of the National Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health study.
138
In addition, regular intake of coffee was also shown to bring beneficial effects for MASLD patients, with significantly decreased incidence of HCC as compared with non-drinkers.
139
Overall, a healthy dietary pattern is generally characterized by an increased intake of vegetables, fruits, nuts, and whole grains and a decreased intake of red and processed meats. However, more specific evaluations are needed to confirm the data and assess the strength of these associations in patients with MASLD and MASLD-HCC.
Weight reduction
It was consistently emphasized by the AASLD and EASL that in patients with MASLD, a combination of a hypocaloric diet and moderate intensity exercise to sustain weight loss should be primarily considered.
139
140
141
Numerous studies supported that losing weight contributed to hepatic benefits with improved metabolic conditions. However, the effects of weight loss on MASLD-related fibrosis seem to be disputable. In a meta-analysis including 2588 MASLD patients who underwent weight loss interventions, amelioration of liver fibrosis was not observed in spite of the decrease in hepatic steatosis and NAS scores.
142
Whereas a Cuban cohort containing 293 MASH patients found that weight loss over 10% exhibited efficacy in the resolution of MASH and regression of fibrosis in up to 90% and 45%, respectively.
131
In the long run, such regression on fibrosis resulting from weight loss may further reduce the risks of HCC incidence. Compared with non-surgical participants, the odds ratio of HCC in patients receiving bariatric surgery decreased by nearly 50%, and the incidence rate ratio of HCC between bariatric surgery patients and the control group was 0.28.
143
Therefore, it is still reasonable to encourage those at high risk to manage their weight.
Smoking cessation
Cigarette smoke is comprised of over 4000 compounds and has been confirmed as a risk factor for MASLD.
144
145
146
A huge Korean cohort enrolled 5,080,410 participants, with 39,910,331 person-years of follow-up, and then revealed that past or current smokers were more likely to have persistent MASLD.
146
Meanwhile, the number of packs of cigarettes smoked per year was also found to be strongly correlated with the severity of MASLD-related fibrosis.
147
Therefore, the significance of smoking cessation cannot be neglected. Evidence has shown that MASLD patients who quit smoking exhibit stronger treatment responses with reduced fibrosis and HCC incidence.
148
Results of a 7-year cohort study, which examined the risk of T2 diabetes among MASLD and non-MASLD male individuals after smoking cessation, emphasized the importance of weight management at the post-cessation stage.
149
Overall, smoking led to increased mortality in MASLD patients,
145
and smoking cessation would be a promising way to improve hepatic outcomes.
Pharmacological treatments for MASLD
Although improving lifestyle is the most effective yet cheapest way for early-stage MASLD patients, it remains difficult for patients to follow those requirements, thus driving the urgent need for drug intervention. Preclinical research has provided fresh insights into therapeutic potentials for MASH treatment. A pivotal enzyme in lipid metabolism, named carboxyl ester lipase, was demonstrated to be a potent target for MASH regression.
150
Traditional Chinese medicines of Pien Tze Huang exerted protective effects by modulating gut microbiota, while celastrol was shown to suppress MASH-related fibrosis by affecting the interaction between hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells.
151
152
Pharmacological p38 inhibitor of SB203580 ameliorated MASH progression through an anti-inflammatory way in macrophages.
153
Here, we mainly introduced the latest FDA-approved drug of Resmetirom and made a brief overview of other potential medications currently involved in clinical trials.
Medication approved by the FDA
Resmetirom, developed by Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, obtained its approval from the FDA in early 2024, offering new hope for the huge population of MASH. Clinical trials date back to 2019. A 36-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study at 25 centers in the USA firstly reported the efficacy of Resmetirom in decreasing hepatic steatosis, as examined by MRI-PDFF.
154
Another placebo-controlled phase 3 trial lasting for 52 weeks in 2023 validated its safety and good tolerance with diarrhea and nausea as the adverse effects at the initiation of treatment, supporting further clinical development.
155
Remarkably, it was reported in 2024 that Resmetirom also displayed robust efficiency on fibrosis regression of at least one stage, in which 966 biopsy-confirmed MASH patients with or without fibrosis were divided to receive different dosages of Resmetirom and then monitored by regular examinations for 52 weeks.
156
These promising results prompted the clinical application of Resmetirom.
Mechanistically, Resmetirom played the suppressive role in hepatic steatosis and fibrosis by agonizing thyroid hormone receptor (THR), which correlates with various metabolic processes.
157
158
One of the receptors of thyroid hormone, THR-β, expressed in hepatocytes, was previously demonstrated to ameliorate triglyceride contents while accelerating lipid oxidation in the liver.
159
160
Such selective regulation contributed to specific benefits in hepatocytes, thus largely reducing adverse effects in other tissues. Furthermore, an in vivo study elucidated that Resmetirom could also modulate gut microbial sphingolipids and thus ameliorating of diet-induced MASH models.
161
However, it was only recommended to be utilized in non-cirrhotic MASH patients by EASL–EASD–EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the high expense of Resmetirom should also be taken into consideration.
162
Emphasis should be placed on the fact that the application of Resmetirom does not mean forfeiting the modifications in lifestyles. FDA noted that combining Resmetirom with non-pharmacological interventions will probably exert its greatest effects.
163
Medications in clinical trials
Besides Resmetirom, there are still many other potential agents under testing. These drugs mainly exert regulatory roles on lipid and glucose metabolism by targeting GLP-1, FGF21, FXR, and PPAR, which have been shown to be effective in treating MASH patients according to different clinical trials.
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
Here, we made a brief summary in Table
3
.
TABLE 3
Agents under clinical trials for MASLD/MASH therapy
Agent
Phases of clinical trial
Target
Adverse effects
Semaglutide
3
GLP-1 receptor agonist
Nausea, vomiting, constipation
Pegozafermin
3
FGF21 analog
Nausea, diarrhea
Efruxifermin
3
FGF21 analog
Nausea, diarrhea
Lanifibranor
3
Pan-PPAR agonist
Nausea, diarrhea, peripheral edema, anemia, weight gain
Tirzepatide
2
GLP-1/GIP agonist
Nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, loss of appetite
Survodutide
2
GLP-1/GIP agonist
Gastrointestinal adverse events
Rapirosiran
2
HSD17B13 siRNA
Not applicable
Tirzepatide
1
siRNA for HSD17B13
Mild injection site reactions
Survodutide
1
ASOs for PNPLA3
Not applicable
Rapirosiran
1
siRNA for PNPLA3
Not applicable
Abbreviations: MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease.
Emerging interests have been raised in GLP-1 due to its potent effects on energy metabolism. One of the most famous GLP-1 receptor agonists is Semaglutide. The latest ongoing phase 3 clinical trial, which enrolled 1197 MASH patients to receive once-weekly subcutaneous Semaglutide at a dose of 2.4 mg or placebo for 240 weeks, has published a planned interim analysis conducted at week 72 involving the first 800 patients.
175
Results exhibited promising performance of Semaglutide in reversing both MASH and MASH-related moderate or advanced fibrosis, with estimated differences of around 15 percentage points between the Semaglutide group and the placebo group. Notably, the most common adverse events are related to gastrointestinal tract and no new safety signals emerged.
175
Mechanically, recent data suggested that Semaglutide promoted the transition of circulating proteomic pattern from MASH to healthy individuals, in addition to its well-known effects on weight loss.
176
Moreover, efforts have also been made to exploit drugs targeting not only GLP-1 receptors. For example, Tirzepatide served as the coagonist of GLP-1 and GIP receptors, while Survodutide is the coagonist of GLP-1 and glucagon receptors. A phase 2 clinical trial demonstrated that MASH patients treated with Tirzepatide for 52 weeks received more beneficial outcomes than the placebo group in MASH resolution without worsening fibrosis.
177
Survodutide showed similar potential for MASH patients according to phase 2 clinical data, but was observed to cause more frequent gastrointestinal adverse events, prompting further investigations.
178
179
FGF21 is an endocrine hormone that protects hepatocytes against stress conditions through various pathways. Preclinical studies highlighted the coordinated roles of FGF21 targeting both the central nervous system and the liver.
180
Efruxifermin is a long-acting Fc-FGF21 fusion protein and was shown to significantly reduce liver fat contents as assessed by MRI-PDFF, according to a phase 2a study.
166
In the subsequent phase 2b study, MASH-related fibrosis was also improved by at least 1 stage in the Efruxifermin group with acceptable tolerability, supporting further phase 3 investigations.
181
182
This regression of fibrosis is independent of weight loss, suggesting Efruxifermin may directly inhibit fibrogenesis. Another FGF21 analogue under exploration for MASH is Pegozafermin, which is underway in a phase 3 clinical trial due to its potent effects on hepatic lipid elimination in previous programs, where 81 MASLD patients received Pegozafermin intervention for 12 weeks and 222 MASH patients for 24 weeks. Similar benefits were obtained in the Pegozafermin-treated group in both trials with respect to liver fat content.
165
183
However, whether Pegozafermin contributes to fibrosis regression still lacks direct evidence, although serum ALT and PRO-C3 (a neo-epitope marker of type III collagen formation and an emerging non-invasive biomarker of fibrogenesis) were observed to be reduced.
Moreover, another prominent candidate of MASH medication is the pan-PPAR agonist Lanifibranor, which is also underway in the phase 3 clinical trial. Previous clinical research reported the efficient effects of Lanifibranor in improving MASH severity along with cardiometabolic health.
184
More recent evidence provided that Lanifibranor treatment contributed to restoring insulin resistance in both hepatic and muscle tissues in MASLD patients, which can hardly be achieved by other drugs.
185
This finding emphasized the inhibitory role of Lanifibranor on the preliminary stage of MASLD in improving metabolic disorders. However, its effects in MASH patients with advanced fibrosis still call for further evidence.
Management of MASLD-HCC
Efforts have been made to explore new insights into specific therapies for MASLD-HCC patients. On one hand, molecular traits of MASLD-HCC were characterized as the enrichment of
ACVR2A
and
TP53
mutations and the proliferative class S1-WNT/TGFβ.
186
187
188
Compared with HCC patients derived from other etiologies, MASLD-HCC patients were reported to exhibit higher levels of hepatic oxidative DNA damage.
189
Moreover, a series of preclinical research also provided multiple molecular targets, ranging from post-transcriptional modifications to the regulatory role of key factors during metabolic processes.
97
190
191
192
On the other hand, growing evidence demonstrated the significant role of gut microbiome for metabolic HCC patients. For instance, probiotics such as
Bifidobacterium pseudolongum
and
Lactobacillus acidophilus
were shown to protect against diet-induced MASLD-HCC mouse models by producing short-chain fatty acids.
193
194
Mice models feeding a high-fat/high-cholesterol diet also highlighted the microbiota dysbiosis during the progression of MASLD-HCC, prompting future applications of microbiota manipulations.
195
Nevertheless, clinical recommendations for HCC patients are currently not affected by etiologies. Instead, the therapeutic strategy for MASLD-HCC patients is mainly in accordance with the 5stages of the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) system, which integrates anatomical, staging, and patient factors for optimal management.
196
Generally, BCLC 0, A, and a subgroup of BCLC B are recommended to be potentially curable by surgical resection or liver transplantation, and ablation. For patients at advanced stages, recent progress in systemic therapies has contributed to the basis of treatment.
196
Hepatic resection
For MASLD-HCC patients, the overall survival benefits after hepatic resection are similar to or even better than those of viral-related HCC patients. According to a systematic review involving 7226 HCC patients (20% with MASLD-HCC) from 14 studies, the hazard ratio of disease-free survival and overall survival after resection in MASLD-HCC was 0.81 and 0.78, respectively, higher than that in HCC patients with other etiologies.
197
Similar results were also observed in another meta-analysis.
198
This may have resulted from a high proportion of non-cirrhosis MASLD-HCC patients, and patients with concurrent comorbidities have been excluded from surgical therapies. Indeed, metabolic disorders in MASLD-HCC patients were considered to significantly affect surgical outcomes, as it was previously suggested that obesity and T2DM patients were more likely to undergo worse post-surgical outcomes.
199
200
Moreover, hepatic steatosis stage was also associated with survival.
201
Notably, recent data indicated greater rates of complications that may happen in MASLD-HCC patients compared with non-MASLD-HCC.
202
203
Therefore, careful evaluation before hepatic surgeries must be done among MASLD-HCC patients, especially with metabolic syndromes.
Liver transplantation
Although liver transplantation is recommended as the primary therapy for HCC patients with cirrhosis, the benefits received in MASLD-HCC patients are inconsistent among different studies. The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) registry analyzed data from 2002 to 2012 and found that MASLD-HCC patients displayed improved post-transplantation survival and a lower rate of graft failure than HCC patients with other etiologies.
204
But no significant differences were observed according to data from the European Liver Transplant Registry.
205
Another study also suggested no significant differences in overall survival benefits after liver transplantation between MASLD-HCC and HCV/alcohol-driven HCC.
206
Moreover, Wong et al.
206
reported a reduced overall survival for MASLD-HCC patients compared with non-MASLD-HCC. It was notable that MASLD-HCC patients seemed to be confronted with more frequent intraoperative complications of hemorrhage and short-term postoperative cardiovascular events, despite the fact that some long-term evidence supported similar overall survival benefits.
207
208
Ablation
For HCC patients not eligible for surgeries, particularly for those with BCLC stage 0–A with HCC nodules <3–4 cm in diameter, local ablative therapy can serve as an alternative option, primarily with radiofrequency ablation (RFA).
25
209
Similar survival outcomes of patients at BCLC 0 or A stages receiving RFA were observed as compared with hepatic resections.
196
However, only a few studies have made a comparison of the efficacy of RFA in patients with different etiologies. A retrospective study using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)–Medicare database indicated that the overall survival benefits after RFA were similar between MASLD-HCC and non-MASLD-HCC.
206
Microwave ablation (MWA) is another commonly used method, which has comparable efficacy and safety with RFA but appears to be more beneficial in patients with larger tumor nodules.
210
However, data regarding its therapeutic effects for MASLD-HCC are lacking.
Targeted therapy (tyrosine kinase inhibitors)
It was not until 2007 that sorafenib was approved as the first systemic therapy for HCC, representing a landmark in HCC treatment.
211
Sorafenib or lenvatinib is now recommended as the first-line agent for HCC patients receiving systemic therapies, and regorafenib, cabozantinib, or ramucirumab in the second line.
212
Current evidence from the Sorafenib Hepatocellular Carcinoma Assessment Randomized Protocol (SHARP) trial suggested that the efficacy of sorafenib may vary with etiologies of HCC, in which HCV-related HCC patients may obtain more benefits.
213
214
However, it was notable that only HCV-related HCC and alcohol-driven HCC were involved for comparison. Another cohort with 5201 patients reported similar efficacy and safety of sorafenib in HCC patients induced by MASLD and other etiologies.
215
But these results might be susceptible to bias as only 3.6% subjects were of MASLD-HCC. In contrast, recent data from a multicenter retrospective study found that lenvatinib tended to be more effective in MASH-HCC patients with higher overall survival than non-MASH-HCC patients, which was subsequently confirmed in another cohort.
216
217
These results together suggested a predictive role of etiology in choosing suitable target therapies for advanced HCC patients. Indeed, validation in prospective cohorts is still required.
Immunotherapy
In 2020, the approval of atezolizumab and bevacizumab marked a brand-new era of immunotherapies.
218
Given that the immune microenvironment is reshaped under MASLD-related HCC, these agents were supposed to bring new hopes. However, a meta-analysis including 3 randomized clinical trials (IMbrave150, CheckMate 459, and Keynote-240) found consistent results that the overall survival rate was higher in viral-related HCC as compared with non-viral-related HCC, indicating that the efficacy may depend on the etiology driving hepatocarcinogenesis.
219
Of note, the efficacy of bevacizumab regarding anti-angiogenesis might be affected by obesity, which is accompanied by the majority of MASLD patients. Preclinical models of breast cancer were observed to display impaired antitumor effects of anti-VEGF antibody treatment in the obesity groups, while pro-inflammatory and angiogenic factors were increased.
220
Nevertheless, a pooled analysis of 8 metastatic colorectal cancer trials suggested that obesity did not affect the survival rate in bevacizumab-treated groups.
221
In MASLD-HCC mouse models, the effects of immunotherapy also seemed to be controversial. One study pointed out that targeting at programmed death-1 (PD1) expanded activated CD8
+
PD1
+
T cells in tumors without tumor regression in the MASH-HCC mice model, whereas to be effective in preventing the non-MASH-induced HCC mice.
222
But more recent research suggested that hepatic TM6SF2 boosted the sensitivity of immunotherapy, while SQLE and METTL3 were two important targets accounting for impaired CD8
+
T cell functions.
97
192
223
Based on current data, clinical evidence is still not sufficient in terms of the efficacy of immunotherapy in MASLD-HCC patients. Prospective evaluation is necessary to better understand the implications of such a method in this population.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
MASH patients with cirrhosis are consistently recommended by current guidelines to undergo biannual surveillance. For non-cirrhotic MASH patients, it is crucial to utilize non-invasive tests for regular monitoring of disease progression. While efficient biomarkers that can replace histological examinations are still lacking, there is an urgent need for non-invasive testing that combines images and serum characteristics. This approach will help accurately identify disease stage during the progression from simple steatosis to liver malignancies. In this regard, we fully believe the indispensable utilization of AI in both developing new models in the future and elevating diagnostic efficacy based on our current imaging and histopathology techniques.
To address the limitations of individual diagnostic methods and optimize the detection of MASLD, stepwise and integrated strategies tailored to clinical scenarios are recommended to be adopted. Prioritizing low-cost and accessible tools is essential. For example, conventional B-mode ultrasound is efficient at the initial screening stage, while the FIB-4 score provides an easily assessable means to identify patients at risk of fibrosis. For patients with abnormal FIB-4 (≥1.3) or ultrasound findings, advanced methods such as VCTE are recommended to quantify steatosis and the fibrosis stages, given their favorable balance of cost and accuracy. Moreover, for obese patients, MRE and MRI-PDFF are particularly valuable due to their higher accuracy. In addition, combining the FIB-4 score with the ELF score significantly enhances the detection of advanced fibrosis. While current non-invasive markers do not yet match the diagnostic capabilities of liver biopsies, our evolving understanding of the MASLD progression highlights the potential of biomarkers for risk stratification and prediction.
The approval of Resmetirom is a landmark in MASH treatment. Other agents undergoing clinical trials should pay more attention to defining non-response and stopping rules, as well as to ascertain their long-term metabolic, cardiovascular, and oncological safety. The potential additive or synergistic effects of combining drugs intended to treat MASH and/or cardiovascular comorbidities require prospective assessment. In addition, effective pharmacies for patients with MASH-associated cirrhosis are also a key issue in future research. On the other hand, combining agents with complementary mechanisms might be a promising strategy as the MASLD pathogenesis is complicated with multiple dimensions. For instance, MASLD patients are often accompanied by obesity and T2D. Based on the blood glucose lowering effects of GLP-1 receptor agonist, phase 2 clinical research found that adding Efruxifermin provided increased benefits for liver health without rising adverse events.
224
Similarly, preclinical data combining ACLY inhibitor with GLP-1 receptor supported greater improvements of liver pathology compared with the monotherapy-treated group in diet-induced mice MASH models.
225
Therefore, combined medications in the future should be considered based on the metabolic characteristics of each individual. Meanwhile, improvements in lifestyles, which are the most effective and cost-free, still cannot be neglected. Future efforts should include patient-centric education, in which digital health tools such as AI-powered dietary trackers and remote coaching can be utilized, in order to effectively raise the consciousness of patients to adhere to lifestyle modification.