In living cells, most proteins
form stable or transient functional assemblies, called complexoforms,
that regulate essential processes such as the
cell cycle, metabolism, and signal transduction.
−
Native proteomics aims to measure
the endogenous complexoforms in cells, tissues, and biological fluids,
in discovery mode and on a proteome scale.
−
While quantitative
bottom-up proteomics
−
and top-down proteomics
−
have been widely used to determine
protein/proteoform abundance changes across various biological conditions,
very few quantitative native proteomics studies have been performed
to determine the abundance change of endogenous complexoforms in cells
in different conditions.
Native mass spectrometry (nMS), which
provides essential insights
into the structures, functions, and dynamics of proteoforms and complexoforms
near physiological conditions, has emerged as a powerful tool for
complexoform analysis.
−
In combination with offline native size-exclusion chromatography
separation, direct infusion, and high-field asymmetric waveform ion
mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation, Fabio et al. performed native
proteomics of breast cancer cells and epidermal growth factor receptor-overexpressed
breast cancer cells, and identified more than 100 complexoforms from
17 protein complexes (≤70 kDa) in the breast cancer cells.
The Ge group applied native proteomics to study
endogenous complexoforms in human heart tissues with automated, online
interfacing of size-exclusion and mixed-bed ion-exchange chromatography,
detecting 133 native proteoforms and endogenous complexoforms (up
to 350 kDa).
Due to the high separation
efficiency and high detection sensitivity
for complexoforms, native capillary zone electrophoresis-MS (nCZE-MS)
has been applied to analyzing complexoforms in low-complexity protein
samples.
−
Our group published the first example of native proteomics of a
complex biological sample using online nCZE-MS, with the identification
of 23 complexoforms smaller than 30 kDa.
In 2024, we detected 72 complexoforms from a whole
E. coli
cell lysate covering a mass range of 30–400 kDa in a single
nCZE-MS run using an ultrahigh-mass-range (UHMR) Orbitrap while consuming
only 50-ng protein material.
In
this work, we represent the first example of label-free quantitative
native proteomics using nCZE-MS for a complex biological sample, determining
the differentially expressed complexoforms during the transition from
logarithmic (log) to stationary phase growth (
Figure
). Once
E. coli
cells adapt
to the new cultivation conditions, they begin to divide exponentially,
entering the log phase of growth. As nutrients in the medium become
depleted, the bacterial culture subsequently enters the stationary
phase, where its internal systems of protection against stress become
activated in response to harsh environmental influences.
,
The
E. coli
cells in the stationary phase can dramatically
change their organization both at the molecular and cellular levels,
achieving orders of magnitude more resistance to antimicrobials and
acquiring the ability to survive even under extremely adverse environmental
settings.
Hence, elucidating the regulatory
mechanisms mediated by distinct complexoforms during the stationary
phase is crucial for advancing both fundamental knowledge and practical
applications.
1
Flowchart of nCZE-MS for quantitative native proteomics
of
E. coli
cell lysate from log and stationary phases.
The
figure is created using BioRender and is used here with permission.
Briefly, the whole
E. coli
cell
lysates from two
growth phases were extracted with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered
saline (DPBS) buffer containing complete protease inhibitors and phosphatase
inhibitors. The cell lysate was buffer-exchanged on an Amicon-10 kDa
centrifugal filter unit to a buffer containing 50 mM ammonium acetate
(NH
4
Ac, pH 6.9) and subjected to nCZE-MS. The online nCZE-MS
was assembled by coupling a Sciex CESI-8000 Plus capillary electrophoresis
(CE) autosampler to a Thermo Fisher Scientific Q-Exactive UHMR mass
spectrometer through a commercialized electrokinetically pumped sheath
flow CE-MS interface (EMASS-II, CMP Scientific).
,
To reduce the protein nonspecific adsorption onto the capillary
inner wall, a 90 cm-long capillary with neutral coating (i.e., linear
polyacrylamide, LPA) was employed for the nCZE separation. The background
electrolyte (BGE) and sheath buffer used for nCZE were 25 mM NH
4
Ac (pH ∼ 7.0) and 10 mM NH
4
Ac (pH ∼
7.0), respectively. To determine the number of detected native proteoforms,
the raw MS data were split into 30-s windows, followed by mass deconvolution
using UniDec and ESIprot.
,
With precursor ion
peaks corresponding to each complexoform extracted from the MS
1
spectrum across runs, the resulting intensities were compared
to quantify and determine the differentially expressed complexoforms.
To further identify the detected differentially expressed complexoforms,
the same samples were subjected to nCZE-MS with in-source collisional
induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation, which generated pseudo-MS
2
spectra by causing subunit dissociation through the unfolding
or elongation and subsequent ejection of a highly charged monomer.
The obtained spectra were deconvoluted using
UniDec and ESIprot, with the masses of monomer and corresponding complexoform
employed, to determine the oligomeric state of each complexoform.
In addition, denaturing top-down proteomics (TDP) was applied to
identify the high-abundance proteoforms from the cell lysate. Following
MS
1
spectral deconvolution with UniDec, proteoform candidates
were determined by matching the observed masses with those listed
in UniProt. Subsequently, the processed MS
2
spectra were
analyzed with ProSight Lite
against the
sequences of the proteoform candidates to assign the corresponding
proteoform.
By integrating the above intact complexoform mass
(MS
1
), oligomeric state of complexoforms (pseudo-MS
2
), as
well as corresponding monomer mass and sequence information (denaturing
TDP), the complexoforms differentially expressed during bacterial
growth were characterized. The detailed experimental procedure is
described in the
Supporting Information
.
To assess the repeatability of nCZE-MS for complex samples,
the
whole cell lysates extracted from
E. coli
cells in
the log and stationary phases were subjected to nCZE-MS in biological
triplicate, respectively. As shown in
Figure S1A
, complexoforms can be efficiently extracted and separated using
CZE-MS under native conditions. A consistent decrease in migration
time in the second and third runs was observed compared to the first
run, most likely due to changes at the capillary inner wall after
the first run of the
E. coli
sample. However, after
migration time alignment, we discovered a high reproducibility in
the migration time and peak intensity of selected proteoforms/complexoforms
separated with nCZE (
Table S1
), with relative
standard deviations (RSDs) of migration time between 0.94%–3.2%
and peak intensity between 12%–27%, which is similar to the
result obtained by simple protein complexes separated under native
conditions.
Figure S1B
shows the extracted ion electropherograms of the selected
proteoforms/complexoforms, which are much wider than those for denaturing
CZE, possibly due to the protein dispersion under the applied pressure
and nonspecific protein adsorption on the capillary inner wall. shows the mass spectra with labeled
charges and masses of the selected proteoforms/complexoforms. The
above results demonstrate the reasonable reproducibility and robustness
of the nCZE-MS method, enabling confident label-free quantification.
After spectrum averaging and mass deconvolution, complexoforms
ranging from 20 kDa to 320 kDa were detected in the
E. coli
sample. Totally, we quantified 33 proteoforms or complexoforms from
the cell lysate, among which 4 exhibited statistically significant
abundance change,
Figure
A and
Figure S2
. The list of quantified
proteoforms/complexoforms is shown in
Supporting Information Excel spreadsheet
. The expression level of three
large complexoforms, whose masses are 88 kDa, 209 kDa, and 211 kDa,
dramatically decreased during growth. Interestingly, a 317 kDa complexoform
was identified as being significantly upregulated during the stationary
phase compared with the log phase (
Figure
A and B), which might play an important role
in
E. coli
growth. The MS
1
and pseudo-MS
2
results showed that the molecular weight of the intact protein
complex is around 317 449 Da, while the released monomer upon
collisional activation is 52 895 Da,
Figure
C and D, illustrating that this complexoform
is a homohexamer.
2
Characterization of the complexoforms that is differentially
expressed
during the two phases of
E. coli
growth. (A) Volcano
plot showing differentially expressed complexoforms between the
E. coli
cells in the two growth phases. Blue dots and red
dots represent complexoforms having statistically significantly higher
abundance in the log and stationary phases, respectively. The numbers
represent the number of features listed in the
Supporting Information Excel spreadsheet
. The molecular weight
of the differentially expressed complexoform is labeled. (B) The electropherograms
of the complexoform (317 kDa) extracted from whole
E. coli
cell lysate in the log and stationary phase in biological triplicates,
respectively. Mass spectrum and deconvoluted masses of complexoform
(317 kDa) with (C) MS
1
, (D) pseudo-MS
2
(in-source
CID), and (E) denaturing top-down proteomics approaches. The sequence
and fragmentation patterns of the detected proteoforms are shown.
We also subjected the sample to denaturing top-down
proteomics
analysis and identified a proteoform with a mass of 52 668
Da, which closely matches the monomer mass of the 317 kDa complexoform
observed in the pseudo-MS
2
spectrum. Our hypothesis here
is that the proteoform forming the 317-kDa complexoform is one of
the most abundant proteins in the sample, considering that the complexoform
showed the strongest signal in the native CZE-MS runs. By searching
against UniProt, glutamate decarboxylase beta (GadB) was identified
as the proteoform candidate. GadB is a homohexamer composed of six
identical subunits, each with a theoretical mass of 52,668.13 Da.
By matching the fragment ions using ProSight Lite, the mass difference
between the theoretical and observed mass is 2.4 ppm, with 40 fragment
ions matched (
Figure
E).
It is noticed that there’s a mass shift (52895–52668
= 227 Da) between the monomers obtained from pseudo-MS
2
and the TDP result, which might come from the pyridoxal phosphate
(PLP) modification (229 Da) on K276 of GadB. As PLP is the cofactor
of GadB, the addition of PLP can significantly enhance the activity
and stability of this enzyme.
While the
noncovalent protein–cofactor interaction is preserved under
in-source CID conditions, the PLP information was lost during denaturing
top-down proteomics, which causes the mass shift. Consistent with
previous Northern and Western blot findings showing increased GadB
expression during the stationary phase compared with the exponential
phase,
,
the 317 kDa complexoform was identified
as GadB with high confidence. Acid resistance (AR) in
E. coli
is defined as the ability to withstand an acid challenge of pH 2.5
or less and is a trait generally restricted to stationary-phase cells.
The GadB is a component of the GAD system, which
is the most effective system of AR found in bacteria able to survive
in extreme acidic conditions, protecting the stationary-phase cell
under naturally occurring acidic environments.
In summary, we demonstrate for the first time that
nCZE-MS is an
effective platform for quantitative native proteomics of complex proteome
samples. Using this approach, 33 large proteoforms/complexoforms were
successfully quantified across two main growth phases for
E. coli
. Furthermore, by integrating in-source CID with
denaturing top-down proteomics, the method enabled the identification
of differentially expressed complexoforms, including GadBa
317 kDa hexamer composed of six identical subunitsconfidently
identified as upregulated during
E. coli
growth.
For better separation peak capacity and reproducibility, procedures
to clean up the capillary inner wall between nCZE-MS runs and improve
the capillary inner wall coating through different chemistries, e.g.,
carbohydrate-based neutral coating,
could
be employed to reduce protein adsorption. This work suggests that
nCZE-MS is ready for quantitative native proteomics to determine differentially
expressed endogenous complexoforms in various biological samples.
Supplementary Material