1
Introduction
The overwhelming number
of contaminants released into the environment
by everyday use and production requires novel strategies for their
detection and identification in environmental matrices.
While many of the single compounds may have limited
impact on environmental health, some might pose significant risks,
either directly or by contributing to complex mixture effects among
which identifying toxicity drivers becomes challenging.
Hospital wastewater is an example of these complex
mixtures, capable of releasing pharmaceutical compounds with considerable
potential for adverse environmental impacts.
These effluents are frequently treated as equivalent to urban wastewater
and sent to municipal treatment facilities, where conventional processes
are not fully effective in eliminating contaminants.
Particularly concerning are the endocrine-disrupting effects
of hospital wastewater, primarily driven by natural and synthetic
hormones used in various medical treatments and therapies.
While new analytical methods can detect
a wide range of the released
compounds, chemical analysis alone does not offer insights into the
sample toxicity. Therefore, combining analytical and bioanalytical
techniques is vital to unravel the potential adverse effects of complex
mixtures in the environment.
,
Effect-based methods
(EBMs) are small scale
in vitro
or
in vivo
bioanalytical tools that elucidate the mixture toxicity of samples
consisting of both known and unknown compounds.
,
These
methods have started to be incorporated into regulatory frameworks
(such as the water framework directive, WFD) for evaluating mixture
risks, particularly in water bodies.
However,
water sectors and regulators are still concerned about the reliability
and interpretation of EBM data.
As regulation
remains primarily compound-based, mainly because mitigation measures
often rely on individual drivers, there is a need for strategies to
prioritize these risk drives in complex environmental samples. Likewise,
a thorough risk assessment requires more than just evaluating the
activity of unknown compounds in an
in vitro
bioassay;
understanding their adsorption, distribution, or metabolism is essential,
and this necessitates knowledge of their identity. Effect-directed
analysis (EDA) is one of the most promising tools for this purpose,
integrating sample fractionation (e.g., by chromatographic separation)
with bioassays and chemical analysis to focus identification efforts
only on toxic sample fractions, containing fewer analytes.
Although laboratory workloads significantly
increase (instead of testing and analyzing one sample, many fractions
have to be handled), testing and analyzing these fractions eventually
helps to prioritize active compounds and consequently their identification.
The large workload is, however, what hampers EDA application in large-scale
studies, usually focusing on one or a few samples. Thus, high-throughput
(HT) techniques encompassing sample preparation, biological analysis,
and data processing are essential for EDA to manage the number of
samples typically handled in monitoring studies.
HT-EDA enhances
traditional EDA by combining microfractionation,
high-throughput bioassays, and efficient chemical and bioanalytical
data processing workflows, all with minimal manual intervention through
extensive automation.
The performance
leap achieved through microfractionation into 96- or 384-well plates
has been well demonstrated in recent studies thanks to their compatibility
with EBMs in the same format.
,
For bioassays to be
compatible with HT-EDA, it is essential that they target highly specific,
mainly receptor-based effects and demonstrate high sensitivity, as
this enables a smaller number of contaminants to explain the observed
effects (category 1 bioassays according to Escher et al. 2021
). So far, some of the endpoints that have been
successfully implemented in EDA workflows using microfractionation
include endocrine disruption [estrogenicity (ER), androgenicity (AR),
progestogenic activity (PR) or thyroid hormone system disruption (FITC-T4
TTR-binding assay)],
−
dioxin-like activity,
or mutagenicity.
Still, the primary
bottleneck in achieving HT-EDA remains in the data processing step
of nontarget screening (NTS). Despite the continuous development of
tools for selecting significant features in HRMS files and aligning
them, clustering isotopologues and adducts within each sample, and
compensating between samples,
the number
of detected candidates continues to be high, even in fractions with
retention time windows of a few seconds. Evaluating and identifying
all these candidates is therefore a significant impediment to achieving
HT-EDA, especially considering that most of them do not contribute
to the specific activity being targeted.
The objective of this
study was to develop a HT-EDA workflow to
identify potentially androgenic compounds in a hospital effluent sample
with high androgenic activity. This work contributes to the broader
objective of the SOURCES project within the NORMAN network, which
aims to identify source-specific contaminants across Europe. For that
purpose, microplate-based fractionation using the Fractiomate was
employed, and the androgenic activity of the extracts and fractions
were assessed using the AR-CALUX assay.
The main innovation of the study, however, was prioritizing relevant
signals based on their MS/MS spectra with the MLinvitroTox
toxicity prediction tool prior to compound identification,
significantly enhancing the efficiency of this step. In this approach,
potential toxicity was predicted before the bottleneck of structural
elucidation and evaluation of candidate structures.
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Sampling
To test the efficiency of
the proposed workflow on an environmentally relevant sample, a wastewater
sample from a hospital effluent was used. The sample was collected
as part of the European SOURCES project of the NORMAN Network, in
which it showed the highest androgenic activity among 124 samples
from various sources (
Figure S1
). The sample
was taken from the raw sewage of a hospital in the city of Berlin,
Germany, by grab sampling 5 L of wastewater. The sample was stored
in a PP bottle at −20 °C until extraction. A blank water
sample was additionally prepared by transferring 200 mL of LC–MS
grade water into a PP bottle and stored with the sample.
2.2
Sample Extraction
Following a protocol
adapted from Välitalo et al.,
previously
evaluated for chemical and effect recoveries in Schulze et al.,
both the sample and sample blank were filtered
through 50 mm GF/F filters before extraction. For each liter of sample,
200 mg of HR-X SPE (solid phase extraction) cartridges (Macherey-Nagel,
Germany) was used, equating to 1 g for the effluent sample. As reported
in the reference study, scaling the extraction conditions does not
affect the comparability across different extracted volumes. The solvent
volumes for the conditioning and elution phases were also scaled according
to the sample volume, using 5 mL of ethyl acetate, 5 mL of methanol,
and 10 mL of LC–MS grade water per liter of sample as references,
applied in that order. The sample (5 L) and blank (200 mL) were then
extracted adjusting the flow rate to approximately 10 mL/min. The
sample blank was prepared using the same extraction conditions as
the sample to evaluate background contamination from the leaching
of tubing and sorbents. After the extraction, the cartridges were
rinsed with 5 mL of LC–MS grade water, and dried under nitrogen
stream until dryness. For cartridge elution, the following solvent
volumes were used as a reference per liter of sample: 2.5 mL of ethyl
acetate, 2.5 mL of methanol, 2 mL of methanol with 1% formic acid,
and 2 mL of methanol with 2% 7 N NH
4
OH. The extracts were
evaporated under a nitrogen stream to reach a final relative enrichment
factor (REF) of 1000 and stored at −20 °C until further
analysis.
2.3
AR-CALUX Bioassay
The Chemically
Activated LUciferase eXpression (CALUX) assay (AR-CALUX) was performed
to evaluate androgenic activity of the sample and its fractions. The
assay was performed on human osteosarcoma U2-OS cells purchased from
Biodetection Systems (BDS, The Netherlands) transfected with a firefly
luciferase reporter gene, coupled to the human androgen receptor (AR)
as detailed in Sonneveld et al.
and Wolf
et al.
Additionally, blank extract and
fractions were also tested for quality control. Baseline activity
was calculated as the median relative AR activity of the fractions
(considering the mean of three technical replicates per fraction
Table S11
). Fractions with modified
z
-scores greater than 10 were considered to have high androgenic activity
modified
z
‐
score
=
X
i
−
M
MAD
where
X
i
AR activity of the fraction
i
,
M
is the median AR activity of all fractions, MAD is the
median absolute deviation, calculated as
MAD
=
median
(
|
X
i
−
M
|
)
2.4
Fractionation
From the sample extract
(REF 1000, 100% MeOH), a diluted aliquot of 10 μL (REF 200,
70:30 MeOH/H
2
O) was injected into the RP-HPLC system (Vanquish,
Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was achieved using
a biphenyl column (Phenomenex, Kinetex 2.6 μm Biphenyl 100 A,
100 × 2.1 mm, equipped with a 5 × 2.1 mm precolumn of the
same type and in-line filter), with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The
mobile phase consisted of water (A), methanol (B), both containing
0.1% formic acid to keep a pH of 2.7, and acetonitrile (C). The gradient
elution program is shown in
Table S1
. Fractionation
steps were performed using a FractioMate fraction collector (SPARKHolland
& VU, The Netherlands). Fractions were collected every 18 s into
80 wells of a 96-well plate (24 min fractionation; the last 4.8 min
of re-equilibration time were excluded), containing 10 μL of
5% DMSO in water used as a keeper. Fractionation was repeated twice,
one for chemical analysis and one for biotesting. The microplates
were dried under nitrogen flow at 45 °C, for approximately 2
h, and stored at −20 °C until further analysis. For chemical
analysis, fractions were redissolved in 200 μL (REF 10) of MeOH/H
2
O (70:30). For biotesting, fractions were added to the exposure
medium to achieve REF 50. To account for potential losses during chromatography
and subsequent evaporation, a recombined extract was also prepared
by placing the output of the analytical column into a test tube, and
drying it under nitrogen flow. The fractionation method was optimized
prior to use on the real sample using a mixture of 56 steroids and
recoveries and potential RT shifts were assessed (
Figures S2 and S3
). No RT shifts were observed, so the Fractiomate
starting delay was set to 0 s.
2.5
HPLC-HRMS Analysis
The unfractionated
extract, blank, active fractions and calibration solutions of targeted
compounds were analyzed in a Thermo Scientific Vanquish HPLC system
coupled to a Thermo Scientific Exploris 480 quadrupole-Orbitrap mass
spectrometer, equipped with a heated electrospray ionization source
in both positive and negative ionization mode (HESI, Thermo Scientific,
USA). To achieve a better ionization and improve the detection of
steroid hormones, atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI)
was also used in the positive mode to complement HESI. To obtain chromatograms
comparable to the toxicogram results from bioassays, the same chromatographic
conditions used for fractionation were applied for the positive mode
(see
Section
).
In negative mode, the chromatographic gradient remained unchanged,
but NH
4
F (1 mM) was used as mobile phase additive instead
of formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in full scan–data
dependent MS/MS (Full MS–ddMS/MS) with an intensity threshold
of 8.0 × 10
4
and a dynamic exclusion of 8 s. One full
scan at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half-maximum (fwhm)
at
m
/
z
200 over a scan range of
m
/
z
80–1200 was followed by 8 ddMS/MS
scans at a resolution of 30,000 fwhm with an isolation window of 0.8
m
/
z
. Further information regarding the
ESI, APCI, and Full MS–ddMS/MS conditions can be found in the
Table S2
.
2.6
Data Processing
An overview of the
data processing workflow is provided in
Figure
.
1
General workflow of the target and nontarget
screening. MZmine
and Compound Discoverer where used in parallel to process the data.
MLinvitroTox was used to predict the toxicity of the features based
on the MS/MS and filter the feature lists. Candidate annotation was
based on spectral library search by mzCloud in the Compound Discoverer
workflow and
in silico
prediction by SIRIUS in the
case of the MZmine workflow.
2.6.1
Target Analysis
The raw data (unfractionated
extract, fractions and procedural blanks) were analyzed using vendor
software TraceFinder 5.1 (Thermo) for the presence of 580 CECs typically
occurring in waste and surface waters including pharmaceuticals, plant
protection products, personal care products and industrial chemicals
(
Tables S3 and S4
). The analysis included
all of these compounds rather than focusing exclusively on (anti-)
androgenic compounds, as the broader project aims to assess a wide
range of micropollutants. For hormonal steroids, a second method was
employed to evaluate the APCI data, where the [M + H]
+
or
[M – H
2
O]
+
was selected as the quantification
ion, depending on which was more suitable. A maximum mass error of
5 ppm was set for peak identification. The acceptance criteria for
each compound included passing the isotopic profile flag, the fragmentation
flag, and falling within the established retention time window (adapted
for each compound). Twelve calibration points in the range of 0.1–750
μg/L were analyzed with the samples. When redissolving the samples,
in addition to the calibration points, a mixture of isotopically labeled
internal standards was added to have a final concentration of 50 μg/L
to correct peak areas for potential instrumental fluctuations and
batch effects (
Table S5
).
2.6.2
Nontarget Screening
The HPLC-HRMS
(ESI+ and APCI+) data originally in raw format was converted to .
mzML
format using the msconvert tool,
with vendor peak-picking for centroiding. The data was
then imported into the MZmine 3.9.0 software for data processing.
The complete workflow of the data processing
steps and their parameters can be found in the
Table S6
in Supporting Information. Since fractionation restricts
the maximum REF achievable in the fractions (REF 10), this strategy
was implemented on the sample and blank extracts (REF 50) to ensure
that low-intensity features were not missed. However, it was also
subsequently verified whether these features were present in the fractions.
The resulting
.mgf
files were imported to SIRIUS
5.8.6 software for calculation of molecular fingerprints.
The molecular fingerprints were saved as compressed
files, and resulting file structure was used for prediction of androgenic
activity using the MLinvitroTox workflow, as described in Arturi and
Hollender.
Briefly, in MLinvitroTox,
supervised machine learning XGBoost classifiers with SMOTE (Synthetic
Minority Oversampling Technique) were trained on SIRIUS molecular
fingerprints to predict nearly 400 target-specific and 100 cytotoxic
endpoints from ToxCast and Tox21 databases. The relevant models for
androgenic activity (i.e., reporter gene assays TOX21-AR-BLA Agonist-ratio
and TOX21-AR-LUC-MDAKB2 Agonist, and the Nuclear translocation assay
UPITT-HCI-U2OS-AR-TIF2 Nucleoli-Agonist) were selected and used to
predict the potential bioactivity of the features in the sample extract
and its fractions. Keeping a conservative approach, any hit (hit probability
>0.5) in at least one of the three endpoints was considered as
potential
active feature. Due to the poor model performance in the negative
mode, the prioritization based on toxicity prediction was only conducted
for data acquired in the positive mode. This list of prioritized features
was used to filter the feature lists, based on their
m
/
z
values with tolerance of 5 ppm, and retention
times with tolerance of 30 s. Structure elucidation was performed
by fingerprint-based identification using CSI:FingerID (integrated
in SIRIUS).
The molecular formula identification
was performed with a mass accuracy of 5 ppm, using the De novo and
bottom-up approach for molecular formula generation (all parameters
are shown in
Figure S4
). Hereby, structural
databases, such as KEGG, PubMed, and NORMAN-SUSDAT were searched for
matches to the predicted molecular fingerprints, leading to level
3 identifications.
In general, matches
with a Tanimoto similarity of greater than 80% and a CSI:FingerID
Score of less than −70 were accepted, although spectral matching
was ultimately subject to manual verification.
In parallel to
the workflow in MZmine, the Compound Discoverer
(3.3) workflow shown in
Figure S5
was used
to streamline identification of features prioritized by MLinvitroTox
in the MZmine workflow. For further identification, the peak shape
of the candidate features was assessed (peak rating >6 and manually
evaluated) and only features with acquired MS/MS were considered.
The structural elucidation was based on the comparison of experimental
MS/MS spectra with the mzCloud spectral library. To aid the identification
of tentative candidates when the spectral library search was not successful,
the NORMAN SUSDAT
and ChemSpider mass
lists were used for providing potential candidates to reinforce those
identified at level 3 using SIRIUS (as explained above). The annotation
of identified candidates was done according to the confidence levels
suggested by Schymanski et al.
Only candidates
within levels 2 and 3 of confidence were reported (i.e., candidates
with spectral library hit or potential structures matching
in silico
prediction, respectively).
The candidates
with an assigned probable structure were semiquantified
using a modified methodology based on the work by Sepman et al.
with slight differences (e.g., ECFPextended
connectivity fingerprintswere also included
). This method was limited to the positive ionization mode
due to model performance limitations for the negative mode, so it
was only applied to this ionization mode. For the semiquantification
of candidates with spectral hit from mzCloud (level 2a), the molecular
fingerprints of the candidates were calculated from their SMILES strings
using RDKit 2024.03.2 and CDK 2.9. For the tentatively identified
compounds (level 3), molecular fingerprints were predicted from experimental
MS/MS spectra in SIRIUS and then used to predict ionization efficiency,
since each candidate has its own SMILES.
To compare the efficiency
of the proposed workflow with previously
available approaches, the sample was reprocessed using Compound Discoverer
in parallel, without prioritization through MLinvitroTox. The detected
features list was reduced by filtering based on retention time (15–20
min), minimum intensity (>10
6
), and peak rating (>6).
The
filtered list was manually inspected to exclude peaks that, despite
passing the filter, did not exhibit an acceptable peak shape. The
candidates retrieved from mzCloud and the masslists for the remaining
features were assessed for independent androgenic activity prediction
using VEGA QSAR.
The final candidates
were compared to those obtained from the workflow using MLinvitroTox.
The same workflow was also applied for the negative mode, since the
MLinvitroTox prediction models for [M – H]
−
generally showed poor performance.
2.7
Contribution of Identified Compounds to Fraction
Activity
The results from the (semi)­quantification and dose–response
curves were used to assess the contribution of the compounds based
on iceberg modeling.
Relative potency
values (REP) reported in the literature were used for these estimates,
or EC50 values were employed to calculate the REP as detailed in
Supporting Information.2
.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Androgenic Activity of the Hospital Effluent
Extract and Its Fractions
The androgenic activity of the
unfractionated and recombined extracts was measured with the AR-CALUX
bioassay. The concentration response curves were normalized to the
response of dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and fitted into a sigmoidal
model against the enrichment factor (
Figure S6
). The effective concentration to achieve 10% of the maximum response
(EC10) for unfractionated and recombined extracts were relative enrichment
factors (REF) of 0.052 and 0.027, respectively. DHT equivalents were
calculated as 278.9 ng DHT/L and 291.3 ng DHT/L for unfractionated
and recombined extracts, respectively. The AR activity of the recombined
extract was nearly 2-fold higher than the unfractionated extract,
which could be attributed to normal variability in the bioassay. Given
the decrease in activity at the highest REF tested, a second approach
was used to calculate the EC
10
using the linear range of
the dose–response curve at the lowest concentrations (
Table S11
). Although the exact value varies slightly,
the differences (EC
10
= 0.07 and 0.03 respectively) remain.
After fractionation, 80 fractions were tested with the AR-CALUX
assay to identify the active ones at a REF 50, which was the highest
enrichment factor that could be tested in the fraction screening.
Ten fractions were found to have quantifiable androgenic activity,
with modified
z
-scores ranging from 18.8 to 97.0
(
Figure
). The fractions
identified as having high androgenic activity were labeled as B8,
C8, D8, E8, F8, G8, C9, D9, E9, and F9, according to their position
in the 96-well plate. The fractions of the respective blank sample
did not show any significant activity (
Table S7
). The toxicogram presented in
Figure
reveals two distinct peaks of androgenic activity.
The first peak occurs between 15 and 16.5 min with fractions B8 to
G8. The second peak appears between 17 and 18.5 min, with fractions
C9 to F9.
2
Toxicogram showing the relative AR activity of the fractions of
the hospital effluent extract tested at REF50 (down) and overlapping
of the toxicogram with the features prioritized and annotated in the
NTS (top). AR activity of each fraction was normalized to the maximum
reference DHT activity. AR-CALUX was performed on 96-well plates.
3.2
Compounds Revealed from Target Screening
From more than 500 analyzed CECs, 26 compounds were found using
targeted analysis in the retention time window of active fractions,
including various classes of CECs, such as pharmaceuticals, industrial
chemicals, etc. As shown in
Figure
, detected compounds were classified in four application
categories, known androgens, pharmaceuticals, disinfectants and industrial
chemicals and additives. Detailed information about concentrations
in the unfractionated extract and fractions, RT and method used for
the quantification of these compounds can be found in
Table S8
.
3
Concentration of targeted chemicals in
the unfractionated extract,
categorized as known androgens, pharmaceuticals, disinfectants, and
industrial chemicals and additives. Bar colors indicate the ionization
mode used for quantification. * Natural glucocorticoids also used
as pharmaceutical drugs.
As expected, several chemicals commonly used in
large quantities
in hospitals, such as disinfectants, were detected at high concentrations.
For instance, hexadecylpyridinium was found at a concentration of
561 μg/L and benzyldimethyldodecylammonium at 173 μg/L.
The high concentrations found for these compounds are above the highest
calibration point analyzed and therefore their correct quantification
cannot be guaranteed and are reported as >20 μg/L. Similarly,
several commonly used pharmaceuticals, such as ibuprofen and rimexolone,
were detected at high concentrations (>20 μg/L). This result
was expected given the source of the sample. While these compounds
may not directly relate to the detected androgenic activity, they
are important for the project’s broader goal of identifying
source-specific contaminants. This is particularly evident for detected
pharmaceuticals or disinfectants. For instance, compared to the study
by Finckh et al.,
concentrations were
found to be about an order of magnitude higher than those in conventional
WWTP effluents sampled across Europe. Additionally, disinfectants
that were undetectable in these WWTP effluents were also found in
the hospital effluent.
The miscellaneous category included a
variety of compounds, such
as bisphenol A and tri­(butoxyethyl)­phosphate, mainly used in the production
of plastics, that had the highest concentration of 1.1 and 0.7 μg/L,
respectively. Other compounds in this category include insect repellents
(DEET) and food additives (triethylcitrate). None of these compounds
were reported to have AR agonistic activity. On the contrary, bisphenol
A was identified as an antagonist of AR signaling.
Seven known androgens were quantified in the unfractionated
extract:
Norgestrel, 11- ketotestosterone, aldosterone, 4-androsten-11β-ol-3,17-dione,
androsterone, 4-androstene-3,17-dione, and testosterone (
Table S8
). Among them 4-androstene-3,17-dione,
androsterone, and norgestrel had the highest concentrations of 0.67,
1.39, and 0.66 μg/L, respectively. Testosterone, the most potent
androgen among the compounds quantified, was found in lower concentration
of 0.06 μg/L. Norgestrel is produced synthetically for its use
in medication to treat hormonal deficiency or as a contraceptive,
and was previously reported to have androgenic activity.
Testosterone and 4-androstene-3,17-dione are
endogenous, but also used as medications, while the rest are primarily
endogenous hormones. All these steroids are commonly found in human
excretions, and their presence in the sample is expected.
,
3.3
Nontarget Screening Results
3.3.1
Prioritization and Identification of Effect-Drivers
in NTS Supported by MLinvitroTox
A nontargeted analysis was
conducted to identify potential effect-drivers within the active RT
window that might have been missed by the targeted analysis. Mass
spectra from both APCI-MS and ESI-MS were used to identify compounds
using Compound Discoverer and SIRIUS. The results of the nontargeted
analysis for confidence levels 2a and 3 are shown in
Table S9
. Initially more than 5243 features were detected
after blank subtraction (peak intensity in samples >300% of procedural
blanks) in the active RT window by ESI+ and 1469 by APCI+ (3016 and
724 with assigned MS/MS data spectra respectively). After the prioritization
of the features based on the predicted AR activity by MLinvitroTox,
only 83 features (ESI+) and 53 features (APCI+) were selected for
further analysis, with 25 features shared for both lists. Thus, prioritized
features constituted only 1.6% and 3.6% of total number of features,
respectively, significantly reducing the workload for further structure
elucidation (
Figure S7
). In turn,
Figure
shows a good overlap
between the prioritized features and the activity peaks of the toxicogram.
After prioritization, 13 features were annotated using ESI-MS data
through reference spectra matches or
in silico
fragmentation
matches. Additionally, 11 features were annotated using APCI-MS data,
with five features being common to both methods.
From these,
eight compounds were identified at confidence level 2a (four solely
by ESI-MS, three solely by APCI-MS, and one by both methods). Additionally,
nine features (ESI-MS) and eight features (APCI-MS), respectively,
were annotated with confidence level 3, with 2–5 probable structures
for each feature (
Table S9
). Therefore,
28 more prioritized (including seven annotated) features were identified
only by APCI+, which means, it allowed significantly increasing the
detectable chemical space. It is especially useful for the identification
of steroid hormones since APCI is often the preferred method for their
detection in complex matrices, providing lower limits of detection
and reduced matrix effects.
At
level 2a, the identified compounds were mainly steroid hormones,
and their metabolites. These include progesterone, cortisol, DHEA,
and various hydroxylated and oxo-derivatives. Cortisol metabolites
(cortolone, 20β-dihydrocortisol, and 6β-hydroxycortisol)
were the largest group of identified steroids. Cortisol is a primary
glucocorticoid hormone, and it plays a role in stress response and
metabolism. Even though there is no direct evidence of cortisol being
an androgen, it regulates the metabolism of androgens, and can alter
androgen levels indirectly.
As the cortisol
is an endogenous hormone, it is likely that it is present in the sample
due to the presence of human excretion.
Additionally, cortisol can also be supplemented in the form of the
medication of hydrocortisone, so the origin of the compound is likely
to be both endogenous production and medication. Similarly, progesterone
and DHEA are essential sex hormones, and their presence in the sample
is consistent with their natural occurrence, as well as the widespread
use in medication. Among the compounds identified at level 2a, DHEA
(REP not available) and 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione (REP = 1.2 ×
10
–3
)
were compounds
with known androgenic properties.
,
Consequently,
the contribution calculation will focus solely on the latter, as no
AR CALUX potency data is available for DHEA.
At level 3, steroid
hormones and their metabolites were the most
common group of compounds including progesterone and testosterone
hydroxylated and ester derivatives. Some probable structures also
included bile acids, such as nutriacholic acid, and cholic acid, as
well as their derivatives. These compounds are human bile acids, produced
in the liver and, secreted into the bile. Some of them, such as brexanolone
and adrenosterone and one surfactant, annotated as either dodecyldimethyl
hyroxylammmonium (DDAC) or lauramine oxide (LDAO), were also identified
at this level. Both of these compounds are common antimicrobial surfactants,
used in cleaning products. Interestingly, DDAC was previously reported
to have androgenic activity,
while LDAO
was reported to be inactive.
Although
the prioritization with the toxicity prediction could guide us toward
one candidate, the MS evidence does not allow us to distinguish between
them. To remain cautious, we have chosen to report both possibilities.
In summary, in addition to the 7 compounds quantified by the dedicated
target screening, a total of two compounds with reported androgenic
activity (DHEA and 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione) were annotated by
the NTS workflow at level 2a. In addition, at least one candidate
with reported androgenicity (DDAC) was identified at level 3 among
other potentially active metabolites that also deserve attention.
The negative mode analysis also identified additional candidates,
mainly metabolites of previously identified compounds, which, although
not prioritized by the toxicity prediction tool, may require further
investigation.
To provide quantitative information about the
identified compounds,
semiquantification was performed in the unfractionated extract, according
to the method described in
Section
. For this purpose, SMILES strings of
the compounds, identified at confidence level 2a, and SIRIUS generated
molecular fingerprints of the compounds identified at confidence level
3, were used to predict the ionization efficiency, and consequently,
the response factor of compounds. The results of the semiquantification
for the unfractionated extract are also shown in
Table S9
.
Although prioritization of compounds by MLinvitroTox
was not applied
for the negative ionization mode due to bad model performance, an
NTS was performed following the Compound Discoverer workflow described
in
Section
. As shown in
Table S10
, 27 compounds
were identified between levels 2a and 2b, and 13 more features were
annotated as level 3. The QSAR prediction identified three potential
effect-drivers, all of which are natural products: xanthohumol, the
glucocorticoid cortisol and steroid metabolite 2-methoxy-estradiol-17beta
3-glucuronide. Additionally, many metabolites of compounds quantified
or prioritized in the second peak of activity (minutes 17–19)
were present. Some of them, such as glucuronide conjugates of testosterone,
DHT or androsterone, elute at retention times corresponding to fractions
F9, G9 and H9. Some of them such as 11-oxo-androsteroneglucuronide,
5-α-androstan-3α,17β-diol glucuronide or 11-beta-hydroxyandrosterone-3-glucuronide
were also detected at retention times corresponding to the peak of
activity between minutes 15 and 16.5.
3.3.2
Comparative Assessment of Workflow Efficiency
The improvement in the proposed workflow’s performance is
evident with the incorporation of the unique tool capable of making
predictions based on MS/MS data (
Figure S7
). However, to evaluate its strengths and weaknesses and to demonstrate
the advancement this workflow brings to HT-EDA compared to alternatives,
it was compared to a workflow that includes toxicity prediction after
structure elucidation. Such workflows, using QSAR modeling to predict
the activity of final candidates, have been widely used in EDA previously.
,
The candidates annotated through the Compound Discoverer workflow
without applying MLinvitroTox, as well as the predictions using VEGA
QSAR for all candidates, are shown in
Table S9A,B
.
The first evident difference between the two workflows is
the applied filters. In the workflow without prioritization, more
stringent filters are used to handle the large number of detected
features, which may lead to false negatives. This resulted in a filtered
list with 1233 features that were manually inspected to exclude peaks
that, despite passing the peak rating filter, did not exhibit an acceptable
peak shape. The same process was done for the 83 prioritized features
in the proposed workflow. After this stage, 378 features were considered
for retrieving the structures of potential candidates for activity
prediction (1107). SMILES were obtained from EPA’s CompTox
database, requiring data curation, as not all compound names retrieved
from Compound Discoverer matched entries in CompTox.
After the
predictions, 61 unique active structures were identified,
leading to the annotation of 15 features at levels 2a and 3. Four
compounds were annotated at level 2a, three of which overlapped with
the five compounds annotated in our workflow (see
Section
). The remaining two were
predicted as inactive (low reliability) by QSAR VEGA. For the level
3 annotations, most features prioritized by VEGA but not by MLinvitroTox
also had some candidate structures predicted as inactive or active
with low reliability, raising the possibility of false positives.
However, it appears that there are two active features (good/experimental
reliability) that were not prioritized by MLinvitroTox. Conversely,
some features prioritized by MLinvitroTox were not prioritized in
this second processing due to failing the stricter filter that were
necessary to manage a more feasible number of features. Within the
uncertainties inherent to each model, the proposed workflow with MLinvitroTox
avoids false negatives arising from filters applied to the initial
feature list and bottlenecks such as peak inspection or irrelevant
candidate structure evaluation. However, applying structure-based
QSARs proves highly valuable for discriminating between candidate
structures in features annotated as level 3. Given the clear advantages
in reducing data processing workload and the comparable performance
of MS/MS-based predictions over structure-based predictions, the proposed
workflow represents a significant advancement in HT-EDA.
3.4
Contribution of Identified Compounds to the
Total Androgenic Activity of the Hospital Effluent
The contribution
of identified compounds to fraction activity was estimated using iceberg
modeling,
assuming that the total bioactivity
is explainable by the sum of the activity of each of the contributors.
In EBM studies without fractionation, contribution is calculated using
the total activity and concentrations of the unfractionated extract,
overlooking possible antagonistic effects. HT-EDA studies can unmask
these effects through fractionation and often use concentration–response
curves of active fractions to explain contributions. However, measuring
the dose–response curves of the fractions to calculate contributions
to overall activity also requires calculating concentrations of the
compounds in those fractions in addition to those in the unfractionated
extract.
Despite the additional work involved, the contribution
of the activity was studied on each fraction independently, using
the concentrations measured in each fraction specifically. Compared
to the approach described by Jonkers et al.,
our method offers two main advantages, though it is more time- and
labor-intensive. First, it allows us to account for the activity contributions
of individual fractions, helping to reveal potential masking effects.
Second, it provides a more accurate estimate of the concentration
in each fraction, as it considers potential losses during fractionation
(differences between calculating concentration in the fraction or
the unfractionated extract can be observed in
Table S9
). Thus, if a quantitative explanation of the identified
compounds’ contributions to the observed activity in each fraction
is needed, this approach is essential. Conversely, if the aim is a
more qualitative assessment for identifying effect-drivers, the Jonkers
et al. approach offers a more efficient alternative.
As described
in
Section
, all
the potentially androgenic compounds covered by the
target analysis elute in the second active region. To reduce the additional
workload associated with optimizing a new chromatographic method tailored
to these fractions, the identical method employed for the unfractionated
extract was utilized, given its demonstrated efficacy in separating
the target steroid hormones. From each of the two activity peaks shown
in
Figure
, three
fractions were selectedD8, E8 and F8 from one peak and F9,
D9 and E9 from the othergiving a total of six fractions for
testing concentration–response curves by a dilution series.
Figure
displays only F9,
E9, and D9, as the rest did not reach 10% activity in the studied
REF range of 0–16, and therefore the concentration–response
curves were not robust enough to derive EC10 values (
Table S11
). Although the relative activity appears similar
at REF 50 for both peaks, cytotoxicity effects at high REFs in gene-reporter
assays often flatten or reduce the effect curve around 30–50%
activity.
The results from the dose–response
curves of the fractions indicate that the activity of fractions D8,
E8, and F8 is negligible compared to D9, E9 and F9. To verify this,
note that the EC
10
of fraction E9 (the least active among
the measured fractions) is REF 0.39. Since the EC
10
values
for D8, E8, and F8 are all higher than REF 16 (the highest tested
REF), their activity would not exceed 2% of E9’s activity.
The NTS results indicate that the two activity peaks may correspond
to the parent androgen hormones (peak 2, RT 17–18.5 min) and
some of their respective metabolites (peak 1, RT 15–16.5 min),
such as 11-oxo-androsterone glucuronide, 5-α-Androstan-3α,17β-diol
glucuronide, or 11-beta-hydroxyandrosterone-3-glucuronide. While these
phase II metabolites are not bioactive, deconjugation can occur during
the sample preparation process, releasing the bioactive parent compound.
Even if the yield of this deconjugation to active metabolites is low,
the much higher concentration of the metabolites (e.g., the peak area
of testosterone sulfate is 100 times larger than that of testosterone)
could be sufficient to account for the measured activity.
4
Concentration–response
curves of the toxic fractions. AR
activity was normalized to maximal response of DHT and fitted to a
sigmoidal curve. Error bars represent the standard deviation of three
technical replicates. AR-CALUX was performed on 384-well plates.
BEQ
bio
-s for each fraction were derived
from their EC
10
value. The bioanalytical equivalent concentrations
were
0.05, 0.06, and 0.049 μg DHT/L for F9, E9, and D9, respectively,
aligning well with the BEQ values calculated by the BDS evaluation
approach (
Table S11
). Three known androgenic
compounds with known EC10/50 or REP values, i.e. testosterone, androsterone
and norgestrel, were used to calculate the contribution to these fractions.
In fraction F9, testosterone and androsterone were detected in concentrations,
accounting for 16 and 34% of the activity of the fraction respectively
(
Figure
A). These
two compounds elute between the latter fraction and E9 in which they
also account for 3% and 11% of the bioactivity, respectively. Finally,
for D9, androsterone was still detected in low concentration, accounting
for 9% of the activity, and norgestrel could explain 226%.
5
Contribution
of detected compounds to the total AR activity with
high level of confidence (A) and including medium level confidence
results (B).
The activity overestimation in fraction D9 might
be due to the
presence of antiandrogenic compounds in the same fraction. Among the
compounds quantified in the target screening, we identified several
known antiandrogenic substances, including bisphenol A, finasteride,
and medroxyprogesterone acetate.
−
Notably, finasteride and medroxyprogesterone
acetate elute within the peak activity window (RT = 17.78 and 19.02
min, respectively), potentially influencing the calculation of activity
contribution in these fractions. Moreover, REP values were not experimentally
measured in this study, but were taken from other studies using the
same bioassay, which may also be the reason for this overestimation,
but significantly increases the throughput of the HT-EDA workflow.
Experimental confirmation would be needed to confirm the REP of this
compound in particular.
Overall, the results indicate that both
natural and synthetic hormones
present in hospital effluent are the contributors to the androgenic
activity observed in the sample. Compared to urban wastewater, where
according to Almazrouei et al.,
the concentrations
of these hormones rarely exceed a few ng/L, hospital wastewater releases
significantly higher concentrations, making it a major source of these
compounds in surface waters. In turn, identifying that androgenic
activity from hospital effluents is linked to a few compounds with
similar structures and properties could guide remediation efforts
toward targeting and removing these specific substances.
Additionally,
the contribution of the compounds, identified by
NTS at confidence level 2a using ESI+, was considered employing semiquantification
results. Only 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione had available information
on its activity in AR-CALUX. The semiquantified concentrations for
this compound in E9 and D9 were 0.17 and 1.4 μg/L, respectively,
and its REP value was 1.2 × 10
–3
.
Therefore, the contributions of this compound
to the activity of the fractions were calculated to be 0.34% and 4.3%,
respectively. Although the explained contribution is not very high,
this is the first time that semiquantification of compounds identified
by NTS has been used to explain their contribution to fraction activity
in HT-EDA. The added value of this approach is currently limited and
requires further investigation, particularly in combination with MS2-based
toxicity prediction, which has proven more informative. This integration
could ultimately enhance the estimation of activity contributions
beyond known compounds. The difference in explained contribution between
the target and nontarget analyses is evident. Although identifying
the precise cause is challenging, three possible explanations can
be considered: (i) the main activity drivers are the compounds included
in our target list, with the unknowns contributing only a small fraction
to the activity in this specific sample, (ii) due to higher uncertainty
in the semiquantification method, the activity of the unknowns may
be underestimated, or (iii) the NTS workflow may overlook certain
active compounds. These possibilities warrant further investigation
in future studies.
It is also important to distinguish the level
of confidence with
which we can report this contribution, as the semiquantification results
are not as reliable as targeted analysis, mainly because it is still
difficult to estimate their uncertainty. Alvarez-Mora et al.
suggested that the explained contribution by
semiquantification results should be reported with a medium level
of confidence, while the contribution confirmed by targeted analysis
using the reference standard should be reported with a high level
of confidence (
Figure
B). Semiquantification results could also be used to estimate the
contribution of these compounds to the total AR activity, thus prioritizing
the most promising compounds that can be later tested for confirmation.
3.5
Novelty, Limitations and Future Direction
of the Proposed Workflow
Since the development of fraction
collectors designed for microplates compatible with high-throughput
bioassays, attempts have been made to develop EDA toward applicability
in monitoring. However, the primary bottleneck has been identifying
toxicity drivers using NTS workflows. Our study aims to bridge this
gap by using a prioritization tool that directs elucidation efforts
toward features relevant to the study’s endpoint. The workflow
demonstrated that prioritization based on predicted AR agonist activity
can significantly increase the throughput of nontarget screening by
reducing the number of features that need to be identified from thousands
to tens (
Figure S7
). Since the machine
learning model for toxicity prediction used molecular fingerprints
that can be computed from MS/MS data for training rather than structure
of chemicals, prioritization can be performed before the structure
elucidation. Until now, some QSAR-based toxicity prediction tools
have been used to prioritize compounds in EDA, but always following
their prior structural elucidation. HT-EDA can, on the one hand, greatly
benefit from tools like MLinvitroTox, and on the other hand, these
studies are ideal for testing the potential of such tools, as they
can be used to prioritize potentially active features in combination
with bioassays rather than to replace them. An important consideration
for applying this approach is the need for high-quality MS/MS spectra
for the features in each fraction.
This
may require rerunning the fractions with a dedicated inclusion list
to improve MS/MS spectral coverage of the MS1 peaks. An important
advantage of MS/MS-based predictions is that they predict the activity
of the feature itself rather than the candidate structures within
each feature. This is particularly valuable for compounds annotated
at level 3, where multiple structures may fit within a single feature.
QSARs could introduce false positives if we were to prioritize structures
predicted as active over other candidates. Therefore, using both tools
complementarily would be a highly effective approach. For instance,
if a feature prioritized by MLinvitroTox has three possible structures,
with only one predicted as active by QSAR, this could serve as evidence
to increase the confidence level of the annotation.
One possible
reason for the overestimated activity attributed to norgestrel could
be the presence of antiandrogenic compounds eluting within the same
fraction. Therefore, screening fractions for antiandrogenic activity
is highly recommended in studies of this kind, even though it was
not feasible in the present study. An alternative recommendation arising
from this study is to incorporate antiandrogenicity predictions into
the workflow, which should be assessed in future research. Furthermore,
as toxicity prediction enables the visualization of potentially active
compound distribution in the chromatogram effortlessly, this information
can guide further refinement of separation in HT-EDA.
Despite
the significant prioritization potential of the workflow,
some weaknesses indicate that further work is needed. For example,
the activity prediction currently only functions efficiently in positive
ionization mode. As mentioned earlier, the study aims for high throughput
without compromising on comprehensiveness and robustness, which led
to using two different ionization sources and analyze the fractions
separately. For this reason, the same workflow should be adaptable
to ensure efficiency in negative ionization mode as well. While not
addressed in this study, the chromatographic conditions employed for
the analysis of the fractions can also be adapted to align with the
elution time of the active compounds. By focusing the optimization
of the separation within a specific chromatogram window, the chromatographic
resolution can be enhanced and the potential for interference between
coeluting peaks can be reduced.
Beyond that, it is clear that
NTS workflows still heavily rely
on spectral libraries, and for many unmatched features, elucidating
their structure through fragmentation prediction with CSI:FingerID
in SIRIUS was not possible. Similarly, semiquantifying approaches
continue to be a source of contention with regard to their efficacy.
While this is beyond the scope of the present paper, it would be beneficial
to further validate their efficacy when used to estimate the contributions
of effect-drivers. Thus, far, it appears that the models based on
ionization efficiency prediction are the most robust. Within these,
there seem to be differences between the use of descriptors such as
molecular graphs or fingerprints derived from MS2 spectra or structures.
An evaluation of their efficacy in EDA studies could therefore be
the next step.
The workflow presented in this study integrates
microfractionation
with downscaled gene-reporter assays and incorporates a novel NTS
approach including advanced tools for prioritization and semiquantification,
maintaining a high level of efficiency for robust HT-EDA. The study
confirmed that the main drivers of androgenicity in hospital effluents
are both natural and synthetic hormones, specifically testosterone,
norgestrel, and androsterone in our case. Additionally, the tools
employed, such as toxicity prediction and semiquantification, are
not limited to androgenicity but can be applied to a range of other
endpoints (refer to Arturi and Hollender
for information on prediction models for other endpoints). At the
same time, as proposed in Alvarez-Mora et al.,
it has been demonstrated that semiquantification advances
HT-EDA by allowing for the evaluation of the contribution to total
activity beyond known compounds with reference standards.
Supplementary Material