Introduction
Unbiased plasma proteomics is a powerful
technique to unravel the
biology, disease pathophysiology, or new biomarkers through studying
blood circulating proteins.
−
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics
allows for the unbiased identification and quantification of plasma
proteins with amino acid level specificity. However, plasma has proven
a challenging matrix due its large dynamic range of protein abundances,
−
which limits the detection of low-abundance proteins, e.g. tissue-leakage
proteins, chemokines, and other signaling proteins.
,
To improve plasma proteomic depth, several strategies have been
developed, focusing either on sample treatment or MS-data acquisition.
Sample treatment generally aims at decreasing
dynamic range,
−
but results in an increased cost per sample. Alternatively,
improved MS-data acquisition methods have been established, i.e.,
independent acquisition (DIA) that offers both an increased proteomic
depth and higher quantification accuracy. Additionally, DIA can be
used in combination with relatively short liquid chromatography (LC)
gradients while maintaining proteomic depth for high-throughput applications.
−
Recently, the addition of ion mobility (IM) mass spectrometric analysis,
used on timsTOF instruments with parallel accumulation serial fragmentation
(diaPASEF),
is increasingly used. This
additional dimension has been shown to separate isobaric peptides
and increase scanning speeds.
−
These developments further enhanced
the application of plasma proteomics in clinical proteomic studies.
,
Notably, analysis of DIA data dependents on experimentally
obtained
spectral libraries
−
or in-silico-generated libraries (DIA-NN, AlphaPeptDeep),
,
henceforward in silico libraries. The wide variety of library creation
methods in plasma proteomic studies indicates a lack of consensus
in the field, especially for the next-generation IM-MS techniques.
,
−
To this end, a previous study has already shown that the optimization
of LC gradients and diaPASEF windows is beneficial for the identification
of proteins, which can be further boosted by the inclusion of extracellular
vesicles.
However, the effects that experimental
spectral libraries have on both the proteomic depth and peptide depth
have not yet been evaluated. Here, we systematically investigated
the impact and implications of library creation strategies in neat
plasma on protein and peptide identification with a timsTOF HT system.
Experimental Section
Plasma Isolation
Citrated whole blood was drawn from
10 healthy volunteers. Plasma was isolated from whole blood by centrifugation
for 10 min at 2000
g
at room temperature to collect
plasma after which the plasma was again centrifugated for 10 min at
2000
g
at room temperature. Aliquots of plasma were
stored at −80 °C until the experiment. Ethical approval
was obtained from the Sanquin Ethical Advisory Board.
Plasma Sample Preparation
Plasma samples were thawed
at 37 °C and 10 μL was diluted in 590 μL of 100 mM
Tris­(hydroxymethyl)­aminomethane hydrochloride (Tris-HCl, Life Technologies,
U.K.) (pH 8.0). Nine μL of 60× diluted plasma was resuspended
in 5 μL of reduction and alkylation buffer (20 mM Tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine
(TCEP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL), 80 mM chloroacetamide
(CAA) (Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MO) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH
8.0)) and then heated at 95 °C for 5 min. After the samples were
cooled to room temperature 30 μL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
containing 200 ng (1:50 ratio) MS-grade Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison,
WI) was added and samples were continuously shaken at 700 rpm at 25
°C overnight for digestion. The digestion was quenched with 5
μL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Rockford, IL) and kept at −20 °C until analysis.
Liquid Chromatography
For proteomics analysis, 500
ng of peptide mixture was loaded in triplicate onto Evotip PureTips
(Evosep, Denmark) according to manufactures guidelines. Gradient was
set to either 15, 30, or 60 SPD with the appropriate manufacturer
recommended analytical columns (Performance column, 8 cm × 150
μm, 1.5 μm (EV1109) and 15 cm × 150 μm, 1.5
μm (EV1137)). For separation, 0.1% formic acid in water (Biosolve,
The Netherlands) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Biosolve, The
Netherlands) were used as mobile phases A and B, respectively.
Experimental Library
For experimental spectral libraries,
an in-house available pool of plasma from 30 healthy donors from Sanquin
(Amsterdam, The Netherlands) was thawed at 37 °C and 60-fold
diluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). For the spectral libraries, the
plasma proteomics sample preparation workflow was scaled up by a factor
of 15.
Off-Line Fractionation
For the off-line fractionated
library, 1.2 mL of the digested plasma pool were fractionated using
in-house prepared StageTips with three layers of Empore styrene divinylbenzene–reverse-phase
sulfonate (SDB-RPS, Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) adapted from Kulak et
al.
Prior to sample loading StageTips,
they were washed with 65 μL of acetonitrile (ACN, BioSolve,
The Netherlands) and 65 μL of 0.2% TFA. After sample loading,
the tips were twice washed with 65 μL of 0.2% TFA and fractionated
with 50 μL of (1) 75 mM ammonium formate (AF, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Rockford, IL) in 30% ACN, (2) 90 mM AF in 35% ACN, (3)
100 mM AF and 0.5% FA in 40% ACN, (4) 117 mM AF and 0.5% FA in 45%
ACN, (5) 133 mM AF and 0.5% FA in 55% ACN, (6) 150 mM AF and 0.5%
FA in 60% ACN, (7) 160 mM AF and 0.5% FA in 68% ACN, and (8) 2×
30 μL of 5% ammonium hydroxide (Merck, Germany) in 80% ACN.
For elution, samples were centrifuged at 200
g
for
at least 5 min or until all buffer had eluted of the StageTips. After
elution, samples were dried in a speedvac at 30 °C under vacuum.
For each of the eight fractions collected in triplicates, samples
were reconstituted in 0.1% FA in water (BioSolve, The Netherlands)
and loaded onto seven Evotip PureTips (Evosep, Denmark), according
to the manufacturer guidelines for LC-MSMS.
Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition
Data was acquired
on a timsTOF HT Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA)
operated in ddaPASEF mode. Precursors were selected based on the default
ion cloud filter, with a cycle time of 1.17 s, including 10 PASEF
ramps. Accumulation time was set to 100 ms with a 100% duty cycle
and target intensity of 20 000 (Threshold = 2500). Collision
energy was set as a linear function of 1/k
0
(0.6 1/
k
0
= 20 eV; 1.60 1/
k
0
= 59 eV). Ion mobility was set from 0.6 −1.6 1/
k
0
in standard methods. For ion mobility fragmentation,
the mobility ranges were set as follows: 0.6–0.8, 0.8–1.05,
0.9–1.15, 1–1.25, 1.2–1.45, and 1.35–1.6
1/
k
0
.
Data Independent Acquisition of Plasma Proteomes
MS-based
plasma proteomics was performed on a timsTOF HT system operated in
the diaPASEF mode. Ion mobility was set from 0.70 to 1.45 1/
k
0
, and collision energy, Ramp time, duty cycle
as stated above. diaPASEF windows were established with pydiAID
based on precursor density and chromatographic
separation for 30/60SPD (). The cycle times were 3.07 and 1.85 s for the 30SPD and 60SPD method,
respectively.
Data Processing
The spectral library was generated
for each library with FragPipe (v23.0),
using IonQuant (v1.11.9)
and MSfragger
(v4.2).
,
The reviewed human proteome database (Swiss-Prot
Database, 20423 entries, downloaded on 8 August 8, 2023) was used
as a database, including decoys (reverse) and common contaminants.
The spectral library was generated with a peptide length of 6 to 50
amino acids was used with maximally 2 missed cleavages, a precursor,
and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and FDR was set to 1% for PSM,
peptide, and protein level.
DIA data was processed with DIA-NN
(v2.0),
using default settings based
on the generated spectral library with a precursor FDR of 1%, a set
mass and MS1 accuracy of 15 ppm, a precursor charge range from 1 to
4, a precursor
m
/
z
range from 300
to 1800, a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, a maximal peptide
length of 30 amino acids. We allowed up to 2 missed cleavages and
3 variable modifications, allowing for methionine oxidation and protein
N-terminal acetylation. We enabled match between runs, enabled protein
inference, and used QuantUMS (high precision) as quantification strategy
and peptidoform scoring. The same settings were used for the in-silico-predicted
spectral library from the reviewed human proteome database (Swiss-Prot
Database, 20423 entries, downloaded on August 8, 2023). All processing
was performed on the same virtual machine.
To include the effects
of restricted search space, we also processed
30SPD acquired DIA data with DIA-NN (v2.0),
allowing up to 1 missed cleavage and 1 variable modification, with
all other settings kept the same as previously described.
Data Analysis
All analysis and visualization was performed
using python (v 3.10). To assess the content of spectral libraries
was based on the library detected precursors in the MSfragger
library.tsv
for experimental data and the resultant library
generated in DIA-NN for the in silico search. For analysis of proteins
and precursors identified in DIA data, the
pg_matrix.tsv
and
pr_matrix.tsv
from DIA-NN were used, after
filtering out common contaminants. The coefficients of variation (CVs)
were calculated based on nonlog
2
transformed label-free
quantification (LFQ) values. Total measurement time was calculated
as the sum of processing time extracted from log files and the experimental
time determined by the total number of samples divided by the LC method.
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry raw
data (.d files) and processed data (.tsv) have been deposited in the
ProteomeXchange/PRIDE archive database with identifier PXD058337.
Results and Discussion
To investigate the impact and
influence of spectral library creations
on the identification of proteins and peptides from neat plasma, we
constructed spectral libraries by either off-line fractionation, IM
fractionation, or combining these methods using a digested sample
from an in-house available pool of plasma samples from 30 healthy
donors from Sanquin (experimental libraries). The experimental libraries
were acquired with ddaPASEF at different gradient lengths (15, 30,
or 60 samples per day, SPD). Additionally we added an in-silico generated
library (
Figure
A).
First we sought to investigate the difference in library contents,
utilizing the spectral library files generated from MS-data acquired
from a single run. Library size for the highest yielding MS acquisition
approach (off-line and IM) increased from 485 proteins to 727 proteins
(50%) with increasing gradient length, without noticeable saturation.
This was observed also for the other MS acquisition approaches (
Figure
B, ). Interestingly, the resulted in silico library after
the DIA-NN search obtained with an in silico search of the entire
reviewed proteome contained similar depth to the highest yielding
experimental library, yet contained less precursors ().
1
Experimental workflow and library specific results. (A)
Schematic
overview of the experimental design and spectral library building.
(B) Comparison of library size based on proteins (top) and precursors
(bottom). (C) Comparison of precursor charge distributions between
libraries was based on the library detected precursors. (D) Comparison
of fragment type distributions between libraries was based on the
library detected precursors. (E) Comparison of fragment charge distributions
between libraries based on the library detected precursors. (F) Precursor
distribution displayed as kernel density estimation of precursors
specific to the in silico build based on 30SPD plasma samples analyzed
with diaPASEF. (G) Precursor distribution displayed as kernel density
estimation of precursors shared between the in silico library build
based on 30SPD plasma samples analyzed with diaPASEF and experimental
library build using off-line and IM fractionation at 15SPD. (H) Precursor
distribution displayed as kernel density estimation of precursors
specific to the experimental library build using off-line and IM fractionation
at 15SPD.
This prompted further investigation of the library
composition.
Although there was a high consistency for fragment type, fragment
charge and precursors charge within experimental libraries, in silico
libraries contained relatively more 1+/2+ charged precursors and less
3+/4+/5+ charged precursors (
Figure
C). Additionally, a higher contribution of
y
-ions and 1+ charged fragments was observed in in silico
libraries (
Figures
D and
E). We subsequently compared precursor
distribution along the
m
/
z
and IM
dimensions, stratified by shared and unique features of the in-silico
and best performing experimental library, respectively (
Figures
F–H, ). The characteristic 2+ ion cloud is present in
all three library types; however, the in silico library lacks the
4+/5+ precursor-ion cloud present in the experimental library (,
Figure
C). We and other have observed that plasma proteins
have a higher percentage of >2+ charged precursors compared to
cellular
proteins.
To our knowledge, research
on algorithms for in-silico-generated libraries in diaPASEF have mostly
utilized (cell) lysates to assess performance of these methods resulting
in a potential bias toward cell-based, and thus 2+ charged, precursors.
Therefore, we postulate that the discrepancy
between the two approaches might be attributed to the inherent difference
between plasma and cellular proteins.
To assess the impact
of the libraries on protein and peptide identifications,
citrated plasma samples from 10 healthy donors acquired with diaPASEF
at 30 and 60SPD were benchmarked (
Figure
A). The smaller library, obtained from IM
fractionation, resulted in the lowest library size and proteomic depth
(388 proteins identified at 30SPD with 15SPD IM library), while combining
off-line and IM fractionation with a 15SPD gradient resulted in the
largest experimental library and highest proteomic depth in neat plasma
(552 proteins identified). (
Figures
A and
B). Overall, an increased
library size resulted in enhanced proteomic depth with a supplemental
effect of an increased gradient length. The gradient length has less
influence on the proteomic depth than the library size. Next, we assessed
the impact of the total time investment versus proteomic gains. The
more time was allocated to obtaining the experimental library, enhanced
the precursor and proteomic depth in neat plasma ranging from 2.8
experimental hours and 27.7 total analysis time with 286 proteins/5359
precursors identified to 78.4 experimental hours and 104.1 total analysis
time with 552 proteins/9308 precursors identified, (
Figures
C and
D). In contrast with previous research,
we found that the in silico library yielded lower proteomic depth.
The increased proteomic depth did not result in an overall lower mean
data completeness or higher coefficients of variation ().
2
Comparison of identified proteins and
precursors by spectral library
approach. (A) Dependency in proteins was identified from DIA data
to the spectral library used. (B) Dependency in precursors identified
from DIA data to the spectral library used. (C) Time investment in
the spectral library building dependencies to proteins identified
from DIA data. (D) Time investment in spectral library building dependency
to precursors identified from DIA data. (E) Overlap in proteins identified
at 30 SPD between the in silico library build and the experimental
library, build using off-line and IM fractionation at 15SPD. (F) Log2
label-free intensity (LFQ) distribution for proteins shared between
both spectral libraries (yellow) is unique to the in silico library
(green) and the Experimental library (pink). (G) Overlap in precursors
was identified at 30 SPD between the in silico library and experimental
library. (H) Boxplot representing the distribution of unique peptides
per identified protein in the in silico library (green) and experimental
library (pink). (I) Von Willebrand Factor (VWF) protein coverage with
peptides shared between both approaches (yellow) and unique peptides
per identified protein in the in silico library (green) and the experimental
library (pink).
Using the in silico library, we were able to identify
less proteins
in plasma samples than the best performing experimental library (462
in silico versus 552 experimental), indicating a suboptimal fitting
of the in silico library data onto the plasma proteomic datasets.
This can stem from the mismatch in library composition (
Figures
F–H). Yet, an in silico
library forgoes the need of additional measurement time, resulting
in advantageous protein per time investment ratio in comparison to
the best performing experimental library (). However, the computational time per sample is higher when
using an in silico library (a 12.2-fold increase, compared to experimental
library), which might be a bottleneck in large clinical cohorts shifting
the balance to an experimental approach.
Between the in silico
and best performing experimental library
approach, 433 proteins were identified in both, 27 uniquely in the
in silico and 118 in the experimental library (
Figure
E, ).
Out of the 27 uniquely identified proteins in the in silico library,
2 proteins (CDHR5, IGHV4–38–1) were also present in
the experimental library. Yet the reason for the sole identification
in the in silico library is unclear (). For the in silico library, the unique protein groups covered the
entire LFQ range, whereas most unique protein groups for the experimental
library are located toward to lower limit of LFQ, improving the dynamic
range (
Figure
F).
This could be especially relevant for applications in disease cohorts,
as low abundant tissue-leakage proteins and disease-specific proteins
can be expected to be present in those patients. No specific pathways
nor networks could be identified from enrichment of spectral library
specific proteins (data not shown). Second, we also compared the overlap
in identified peptides between both library approaches and found that
5051 peptides were shared, although we again observed unique peptides
to both approaches (
Figure
G). More peptides were detected with the experimental library,
resulting in more peptides per proteins. For this non-normal distribution
the interquartile range shifted from 2–12 to 2–15 peptides
per protein in the in silico compared to the experimental, respectively
(
Figure
H, ). Importantly, increased peptide per
proteins detected with experimental libraries is relevant for peptide-centric
analysis, such as proteoform analysis, in which the interpeptide correlations
are of high relevance.
For example, von
Willebrand factor (VWF) is a highly polymorph protein,
where polymorphisms can influence its function
and dictate clinical phenotype. For this protein, the experimental
library (44.3% coverage) allowed for a higher sequence coverage compared
to that of the in silico library (33.7%) (
Figure
I).
Since the
in silico library might suffer from the set search space
for the prediction of libraries, we then reanalyzed the data from
both the in silico and best performing experimental library approach
with more restrictive search space. Although the results were identical
for the experimental library, we found increased protein identifications
along with decreased precursor identifications for the in silico library
(). These results highlight the
possible benefit of restrictive search space in protein identification
in the absence of experimental libraries, although at the risk of
lower protein coverage.
In this study, the
impact and implications of library creation
strategies in neat plasma on protein and peptide identifications were
systematically evaluated with a timsTOF HT system. The highest proteomic
depth was achieved with the experimental library, closely followed
by the in silico library. This high proteomic depth observed for the
in silico library is in agreement with previous studies in plasma
on a timsTOF HT system.
As the in silico
libraries indeed generated similar proteomic depth without experimental
time, this approach would be a time-efficient approach for protein-centric
studies, although the additional computational demands could provide
a bottleneck. Interestingly, increased protein coverage was observed
when an experimental library was used. In interpretation of these
findings it should considered that this study conducted DIA-NN, and
as a result the conclusions drawn might be reflective of software
performance as different software tools generate their own predicted
libraries and use distinct signal extraction and scoring parameters.
Concluding, studies that aim to include precursor- or peptide-centric
analysis to study proteoforms, for example, will benefit from investing
time in building experimental libraries.
Supplementary Material