1
Introduction
The cellular surfaceome
– the collection of proteins found
in the cellular plasma membrane and at its extracellular side –
maintains cell homeostasis and is involved in cellular communication.
Cell surfaces are dynamic structures, and many
cell surface proteins function as receptors, transporters, carriers,
channels, in cell adhesion, or as enzymes, and respond to the extracellular
environment by triggering downstream signaling events. The surfaceome
also reflects intracellular changes resulting from disease or infection,
affecting surface protein levels, exposing different proteoforms,
and presenting antigens.
−
Surface proteins are a major category
of drug targets due to their accessibility and ability to modify cellular
signaling pathways. In fact, over 60% of current clinical drugs target
membrane proteins.
,
Significant efforts have also
been made to identify specific surface markers as key pathogen antigens
involved in host–pathogen interactions, particularly for vaccine
development.
More recently, monoclonal
antibodies directed at cell surface proteins have proven to be more
valuable and specific than conventional therapies in the treatment
of cancers, autoimmune diseases, and other conditions.
Despite their biological importance, comprehensive analysis
of the cell surfaceome remains challenging due to the hydrophobic
nature of membrane proteins and their lower abundance compared to
cytoplasmic proteins. Surface proteins have structural regions and/or
domains that span membranes and are enriched in hydrophobic amino
acids.
Upon protein extraction, such hydrophobic
regions can promote protein aggregation and precipitation, leading
to incomplete extraction and difficult isolation of membrane proteins.
Chaotropes and detergents can be used to counter these challenges,
but are often incompatible with downstream mass spectrometry (MS)
analysis. In this respect, Suspension TRAPping Filter (S-TRAP) sample
preparation effectively handles denaturation and solubilization of
membrane proteins with strong detergents, and was shown to be beneficial
for comprehensive proteome analysis.
In
addition, the often heavily modified globular parts and extracellular
loops of membrane proteins can sterically hinder proteases, resulting
in too few and/or too long peptides upon digestion, which hinders
proper MS analysis.
Next to these
intrinsic properties of surface proteins that complicate
their identification, these proteins are generally also present at
lower levels compared to cytoplasmic proteins. Therefore, surface
proteins have been enriched by various methodologies including density-gradient
centrifugation, affinity capture using antibodies or lectins, and
upon chemically labeling their extracellular regions. In fact, chemical
methods that tag surface proteins are extensively used.
Among these, derivatives containing biotin coupled
to different warheads that target primary amines,
,
carboxyl groups,
sulfhydryl groups,
and glycans,
,
are among
the most used. Since the ε-amine of lysine is intrinsically
nucleophilic and often exposed, cell surface biotinylation by tagging
surface-exposed lysines with
N
-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS) esters is a powerful method to enrich cell surface proteins.
However, NHS-esters are prone to rapid hydrolysis
in aqueous environments and also exhibit reactivity toward serine,
threonine, and tyrosine side-chains.
In
addition, NHS-biotin may permeate biological membranes, leading to
biotinylation of cytosolic proteins,
and
thus false positive surface protein identifications. To mitigate this
issue, NHS-biotin derivatives containing a sulfonate group and varying
spacer arm lengths have been developed. However, steric hindrance,
long hydrophobic chains and remaining membrane permeability continue
to limit the efficient use of these reagents for labeling cell surface
proteins.
Therefore, there remains a
need for alternative surface–protein enrichment methods with
high specificity for surface proteins.
Furan chemistry was shown
to be effective for mediating protein–protein
cross-linking,
including coupling ligands
to cell surface receptors on living cells.
Initially, furan-oxidation cross-linking was developed for various
in vitro intermolecular applications including DNA-, RNA-, or PNA-interstrand
and DNA-peptide complex cross-linking. The furan moiety acts as a
warhead that can be selectively and spatiotemporally triggered into
a keto-enal form upon the production of singlet oxygen
,
or by the oxidative agent N-bromosuccinimide.
,
Lysine and cysteine residues are effective nucleophiles for the
so-generated keto-enal moiety and form covalent bonds with these keto-enals.
−
We hypothesized that the furan moiety coupled to biotin could be
an attractive tag for cell surface protein profiling. In a previous
paper, we described a method to isolate proteins labeled with a furan-biotin
probe.
Here, we show that furan-biotin
probes can be selectively triggered to form covalent bonds with surface
proteins upon activation by oxidation. When comparing to biotinylation
of surface proteins using NHS-biotin ester, our method further shows
higher specificity in enriching surface proteins. Furthermore, we
show that furan-biotin can be used to profile and distinguish different
cell lines.
2
Experimental Section
Experimental details
on
Furan-biotin probes
and
R
Coil
peptide synthesis, high-performance
liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry characterization,
and
nuclear magnetic resonance
are provided in the
Supporting Information
.
2.1
Cell Culture
MCF-7 cells from the
America Type Culture Collection (ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine
serum at 37 °C and in 5% CO
2
in a humidified atmosphere.
2.2
Cell Surface Fluorescent Labeling
MCF-7 cells were seeded onto an μ-Slide 8-well chamber plate
(Ibidi) and grown until subconfluence. Cells were washed three times
with ice-cold PBS, followed by incubation in PBS containing 100–500
μM of the furan-biotin compounds (FB1–6) for different
times on ice. A negative control for FB labeling was performed in
the same conditions containing DMSO in equal volumes of the furan-biotin
condition. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Fixing
solution was removed, cells washed three times with PBS and incubated
with 1% BSA in PBS for 30 min at room temperature. In the
Figure S22
C, cells were permeabilized as indicated
with 0.1% saponin for 10 min prior 1% BSA incubation. Subsequently,
cells were stained with 1 μg/mL Streptavidin-488 and 1 μg/mL
DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) for 1 h at room temperature
in the dark. Staining solution was removed and cells washed three
times with PBS. Fluorescence was visualized with the spinning disk
and LSM 780 confocal microscopes (Zeiss). The obtained images were
processed with ImageJ2.
2.3
Cell Surface Labeling and Pull-Down of Biotinylated
Proteins
After cell surface labeling with the furan-biotin
probes, cell lysis and avidin pull-down assays were performed as previously
described.
Briefly, MCF-7 cells grown
in 100 mm plates until they reached subconfluence, were washed three
times with ice-cold PBS. Then, each plate was incubated for 15 min
on ice with 5 mL of PBS containing 500 μM sulfo-NHS-biotin (EZ-Link
Sulfo-NHS-biotin, Thermo Fischer Scientific) or 500 μM furan-biotin
on ice. The control samples were incubated with DMSO (0.4%, 5 mL/dish)
as the stock solutions of FB and the sulfo-NHS-biotin were dissolved
in 0.4% DMSO. Each experiment was performed in at least three replicates.
Following incubation, the cells were washed three times with 10 mL
of ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed by adding 1 mL of lysis buffer (50
mM 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)­piperazin-1-yl]­ethanesulfonic acid pH 8.0,
0.5% DOC, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) 150 mM NaCl, 1X protease
inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland)) and scrapped. The lysates were
collected and sonicated 9 times for 2 s at 30 kHz and left in an end-over-end
rotator for 30 min at 4 °C. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min
at 14,000×
g
at 4 °C and supernatants collected.
The protein concentration was determined by a standard Bradford assay.
Two mg of protein adjusted to a 2 mL volume with lysis buffer was
mixed with 50 μL of neutravidin agarose resin (previously equilibrated
with lysis buffer) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated in an
end-over-end rotator for 2.5 h at 4 °C. For DIA pull-downs (
Figure
), 800 μg of
protein adjusted to 800 μL with lysis buffer was mixed with
30 μL of neutravidin agarose resin. Then, beads were precipitated
for 3 min at 800×
g
at 4 °C and washed three
times with lysis buffer by incubating each wash for 15 min at 4 °C.
Then, the beads were washed with 1 mL of urea buffer (50 mM HEPES
pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 M urea) for 15 min at 4 °C, 1 mL of lysis
buffer supplemented with 20 mM iodoacetamide and 10 mM Tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine
for 30 min in the dark, followed by a wash with 1 mL of 50 mM TEAB.
The proteins were on-bead digested overnight at 37 °C in 200
μL of 50 mM TEAB using 1.5 μg of trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg,
Wisconsin, USA). Following digestion, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation
and the supernatant containing the digested peptides was transferred
to new LoBind Eppendorf tubes and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added
to a final concentration of 0.1% to halt trypsin digestion. The peptides
were then cleaned with C18 ZipTips using the manufacturer’s
protocol (Ziptip Bond Elut OMIX; Agilent, Santa Clara California,
USA) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.
2.4
LC–MS/MS Analysis
Peptides
were resuspended in loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in
water/acetonitrile (ACN) (99.5:0.5, v/v).
2.4.1
Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA)
The peptide mixtures (15 μL out of 20 μL) were analyzed
by LC–MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line
connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Trapping of the mixture was performed in loading solvent
A (0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v:v)) on a 20 mm trapping
column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm
beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). Peptide separation was
on a 200 cm μPAC column (C18-end-capped functionality, 300 μm
wide channels, 5 μm porous-shell pillar, interpillar distance
of 2.5 μm and depth of 20 μm; PharmaFluidics, Belgium).
A linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in water:ACN (2:8, v:v)) reaching
99% solvent B at 120 min was used to elute the peptides. The flow
rate started at 750 nL/min and was decreased after 15 min to a constant
flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data-dependent mode was enabled on the mass
spectrometer to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition
for the most abundant precursor ions in a given MS spectrum during
1 s. Full-scan MS spectra (300–1,500
m
/
z
) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap
analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with
a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The precursor ions were filtered
for charge states (2–7 required), dynamic range (60 s; ±10
ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 5E3). The precursor
ions were isolated in the quadropole with an isolation window of 1.2
Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 1.2E4 or a maximum injection
time of 40 ms and fragmented using HCD fragmentation (34% NCE). The
fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate.
2.4.2
Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA)
The peptide mixtures (3 μL out of 20 μL) were injected
for LC–MS/MS analysis on an Vanquish Neo UHPLC System in-line
connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Injection was performed in heated trap-and-elute workflow
in combined Control mode (maximum flow of 60 μL/min and maximum
pressure of 800 bar) in loading solvent A on a PepMap Neo Trap column
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, 300 μm internal diameter (I.D.),
5 μm beads). The peptides were separated on a 110 cm μPAC
prototype column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept at a constant temperature
of 45 °C. Peptides were eluted by a gradient starting at 0.5%
MS strong wash solvent (SW) (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) reaching 26%
MS SW in 30 min, 44% MS SW in 38 min, 56% MS SW in 40 min followed
by a 5 min wash at 56% MS SW. The flow rate was set to 250 nL/min.
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition
mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan
MS spectra ranging from 400 to 700
m
/
z
with a Normalized AGC target value of 100%, a maximum fill time
of 50 ms and a resolution at of 60,000 were followed by 30 quadrupole
isolations with a precursor isolation width of 10
m
/
z
for HCD fragmentation at an NCE of 34% after
filling the trap at a target value of 4E5 for maximum injection time
of 54 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 at 200
m
/
z
in the Orbitrap analyzer without multiplexing.
The isolation intervals were set from 400 – 700
m
/
z
with a width of 10
m
/
z
using window placement optimization.
2.5
Database Searching
MaxQuant (version
1.6.11.0) was used for DDA data, with default search settings in the
Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to
1% on the level of protein and peptide. The MS/MS spectra were searched
against the human SwissProt/UniProt database (January 2021,
www.uniprot.org
). During the main
search, the mass tolerances for the precursor and fragment ions were
set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was set in the enzyme
specificity setting with the maximum number of missed cleavages set
at two. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set
as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set
as a fixed modification. A minimum of one peptide was required for
identification and matching between runs between all the samples was
allowed using a 1 min time window and a 20 min alignment window. The
built-in MaxLFQ software was used for quantification requiring minimum
two unique peptides for quantification.
DIA spectra were searched
with the DIA-NN software (version 2.1.0) in library-free mode against
the SwissProt database (January 2024) supplemented with the avidin
protein sequence. The mass accuracy was set to 10 and 15 ppm for MS1
and MS2, respectively, with a precursor FDR of 0.01. Enzyme specificity
was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable
modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues (to sulfoxides)
and acetylation of protein N termini. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines
was set as a fixed modification. The peptide length range was set
to 7 to 30 residues with a precursor charge state between 1 and 4
and an
m
/
z
range between 400 to
700 and 200–1800 for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively.
Cross-run normalization was set to retention time dependent with the
quantification strategy set to QuantUMS (high precision) and the neural
network classifier to cross-validated.
2.6
Data Analysis
Perseus (version 1.6.5.0)
was used to analyze the data obtained by MaxQuant. Proteins identified
by site and contaminants were removed. Any missing values (NaN) were
imputed to perform statistical analyses. The missing values were replaced
by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution of 1.8 standard
deviation down shift and with a width of 0.3 of each sample. To compare
conditions,
t
tests (FDR = 0.05, S0 = 0.1) were performed
between three replicates. A Mann–Whitney test was performed
to compare median-normalized iBAQ intensities between groups. A Kluskal-Wallis
test with Dunn’s correction was performed to compare coefficients
of variation between data from FB1, FB6 and sulfo-NSH-biotin pull-down
experiments. The result file from DIA-NN was further processed in
KNIME (
https://www.knime.com/
; v4.7.2) by removing nonproteotypic peptides and identifications
with a protein Lib.PG.Q-value above 0.01. PG.MaxLFQ values were used
for protein comparison between groups. Further data analysis was performed
with RStudio (
https://rstudio-desktop.en.download.it/
; 2023.12.1). The surface
proteins were mapped using the CIRFESS tool (
https://www.cellsurfer.net/cirfess
). Gene Ontology (GO) terms were annotated with STRING database version
12 (
https://string-db.org/
) against the
Homo sapiens
genome
or the indicated gene set, as background. Graphs were built using
RStudio and GraphPad Prism version 10.0.2.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Design and Characterization of Furan-Biotin
Probes
The design of a chemical probe for proteomic applications
requires careful consideration when targeting reactive residues on
the membrane of living cells. The labeling reaction itself should
be highly efficient, compatible with physiological conditions, and
membrane-specific to prevent labeling of cytoplasmic proteins. The
reactivity of furan was previously explored in a coiled-coil peptide
dimer, which demonstrated high specificity and efficiency for lysine
and cysteine, lower cross-linking yields with tyrosine, and no reactivity
toward proximate histidine, serine, or tryptophan residues.
Furan chemistry was also found compatible with
cellular conditions, as shown by the incorporation of a furan-containing
amino acid into the kisspeptin-10 peptide ligand and its subsequent
cross-linking to the KISS1 membrane receptor on live cancer cells.
Furthermore, the furan moiety is activated into
a reactive keto-enal using an oxidative chemical trigger, such as
N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) or singlet oxygen (
1
O
2
).
−
,
We synthesized six furan-biotin
probes, designated as FB1 to FB6 (
Figure
). Each furan-biotin probe includes a furan
moiety (caged warhead) for covalent binding to lysine and cysteine
residues on proteins upon activation, and a biotin affinity tag for
both visualization as well as to enable affinity-based purification
of furan-labeled surface proteins. FB1 contains only the furan and
biotin moieties, whereas FB2-FB6 also incorporate aspartic and sulfonic
acid groups at various positions (
Figure
). These negatively charged groups reduce
membrane permeability and are thereby expected to enhance labeling
specificity for surface proteins. Notably, should the furan probe
enter cells via diffusion or endocytosis, it would likely remain inactive
in the reducing environment of the cytoplasm, preventing intracellular
protein capture. Details of the synthesis for the furan-biotin probes
are provided in the Supporting Information (
Sections 1.2 and 1.3
). All probes were characterized by analytical reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC), liquid chromatography-electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS), and nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), as shown in
Figures S1–S13
.
1
Chemical structures of the furan-biotin (FB) probes. The furan
moiety shown in blue is the caged warhead that can be activated by
NBS to react with lysine and cysteine residues. Biotin is shown in
red; note that aspartic and sulfonic acid groups were incorporated
at various positions to reduce membrane permeability of the probes.
FuA: furylalanine.
3.2
Reactivity of FB1 with Model Peptides
The reactivity of the FB1 probe was first assessed with lysine, cysteine,
and tyrosine using three model peptides: Aba-RIAALRE
K
IAALRERIAALRE-NH
2
, Aba-RIAALRE
C
IAALRERIAALRE-NH
2
, and Aba-RIAALRE
Y
IAALRERIAALRE-NH
2
(
Section 1.3, Figures S14–S16
)
.
These peptides referred to as R
Coils,
consist of three
heptads repeats of RIAALRE, forming a right-handed α-helix.
The arginine (R) at position 8 was substituted
with lysine, cysteine, or tyrosine, resulting in R
Coil
-Lys-8,
R
Coil
-Cys-8, and R
Coil
-Tyr-8, respectively.
An aminobenzoic acid (Aba) group was added at the N-terminus to enhance
UV detection during HPLC analysis. Lys, Cys, and Tyr residues were
positioned centrally in the peptide sequence, not at the N- or C-termini.
The FB1 probe was incubated with R
Coil
-Lys-8 in PBS buffer,
and the furan moiety was oxidized to a reactive keto-enal with lower
or equivalent amounts of NBS for 1 h. A 4-ketoamide cross-linked product
can be formed between the oxidized furan-biotin probe and the amine
group of the R
Coil
, as previously described,
,
and illustrated in
Figure
A. HPLC and MS analysis (
Figures
B,C and
S17
) confirmed
successful labeling of the model peptide by detecting an expected
mass increase of 337.2 Da (
Figure
C). A minor secondary product corresponding to the
oxidized cross-linked product (+16 Da) was also observed, as was also
previously reported.
2
Labeling of lysine with
the FB1 probe. (A) Chemical structure of
FB1 and its reaction product with lysine in peptides in PBS buffer
(pH = 7.4) after addition of NBS. (B) RP-HPLC-UV chromatogram (214
nm) of the reaction mixture of R
Coil
-Lys-8 (500 μM)
and FB1 (500 μM) after adding NBS (500 μM) for 1 h. (C)
ESI–MS spectra of the R
Coil
-Lys-8 model peptide
(left panel) and of the product after reaction with FB1 (right panel).
The reactivity of the furan-biotin probe with R
Coil
-Cys-8
and R
Coil
-Tyr-8 was also evaluated (
Figures S19–S21
). Besides lysine, also cysteine was
able to react with the furan moiety without proximity. No cross-linked
products were observed for R
Coil
-Tyr-8 (
Figure S21
). LC–MS analysis confirmed successful labeling
of R
Coil
-Cys-8 by detecting a mass increase of 339.13 Da
(
Figures S19 and S20
). This mass corresponds
to the Michael-type addition of the cysteine thiol group to the α,β-unsaturated
double bond of the activated furan moiety (keto-enal-biotin) after
NBS oxidation, as previously reported
(
Figure S18
). We also noted that the
R
Coil
-Cys-8 formed a disulfide bond dimer upon NBS treatment
(
Figures S19 and S20
) and coeluted with
the cross-linked product.
3.3
Furan-Biotin Probes Label Surface Proteins
on Living Cells
Having established their reactivity toward
lysine and cysteine residues, we proceeded to test the capability
and efficiency of the furan-probes to label cell surface proteins.
To evaluate the surface labeling efficiency of the FB compounds, we
performed staining experiments on cultured cells. The cells were treated
with 500 μM of each of the six FB compounds for 15 min, in the
presence of the oxidative reagent NBS. As shown in
Figure
, all six FB compounds labeled
cells only upon oxidation with NBS, indicating that oxidation of the
furan moiety is crucial for protein labeling. The staining pattern
of all FB compounds was consistent with surface protein localization
and clearly delimited the plasma membrane and the extracellular space,
suggesting surface protein labeling. FB1 exhibited the highest staining
intensity, and FB4 and FB6 showed the best staining performance among
the negatively charged FB variants. Labeling times as short as 5 min
and lower FB1 concentrations also showed specific surface protein
labeling (
Figure S22
), which indicates
that FB1 is highly effective in cell surface protein labeling, and
that adding a negatively charged group does not improve the selectivity
of cell surface labeling. FB1 and FB6, exhibiting the highest staining
intensities, were selected for further experiments.
3
Streptavidin staining
of proteins labeled with furan-biotin compounds
(FB1–6). Streptavidin staining reveals a protein pattern lining
the cell surface. The images show maximum projections of z-stack captions.
Blue: DAPI staining; bar, 20 μm.
3.4
Furan-Biotin Probes Allow to Enrich for Cell
Surface Proteins
To assess the efficiency of cell surface
protein capture using the FB compounds, we conducted protein pull-down
assays on MCF-7 cells. Living cells were labeled with FB1 or FB6 in
the presence or absence of NBS, followed by cell lysis, neutravidin
enrichment and on-bead protein digestion.
Protein digests were analyzed by LC–MS/MS. Nonlabeled cells
were used as a negative control to compare with the enriched proteins
in the furan-labeled samples. In total, 584 and 618 proteins respectively
were considered as significantly enriched in the oxidized FB1 or FB6
pull-downs (
p
-value <0.05) (
Figure
A,
Tables S1–S3
). NBS significantly increased the number of proteins pulled down
by the FB1 and FB6 compounds (
Figure S23
). This increase was particularly obvious for cell surface-related
proteins, as 57% of the proteins enriched with FB1 and 40% of those
enriched with FB6 were annotated as surface proteins using CIRFESS,
a resource that integrates predicted and annotated cell surface and
extracellular proteins (
Figure
A).
The top gene ontology (GO)
enrichment terms for both FB1 and FB6 pull-downs were also associated
with cell surface proteins, further confirming the enrichment specificity
of our method (
Figures
B and
S24
). Abundant surface proteins
such as the adhesion molecules
NCAM2
and
NRCAM
, the transferrin receptor (
TFRC
)
and the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (
IGF1R
) are among the most abundant proteins pulled down by both compounds.
Of the enriched surface proteins, 82% and 76% were exclusively identified
in the FB1 and FB6 pull-downs, respectively, and absent in the negative
control, also indicating the specificity of the furan probes to label
and capture surface proteins (
Tables S4 and S5
). In a comparison of both data sets, 75% of the proteins were commonly
identified between FB1 and FB6, (
Figure
C,
Table S6
).
Seventy-three percent of the surface proteins annotated by the CIRFESS
tool were commonly identified in pull-downs by both furan moieties,
while 22.5 and 4.5% were uniquely identified in the FB1 and FB6 pull-downs,
respectively (
Table S6
). This indicates
that the majority of surface proteins are targeted by both compounds,
although FB1 seem to label a broader range of surface proteins. Moreover,
the relative abundance of most surface proteins is higher in FB1 pull-downs
compared to FB6 (
Figure
D,
Table S7
). Surface proteins such as
E-cadherin (
CDH1
), Cadherin-3 (
CDH3
), Mucin-1 (
MUC1
), Plexin-A3 (
PLXNA3
) and 4F2 heavy chain antigen (
SLC3A2
) show 3 to
15-fold more abundance in FB1compared to FB6 (
Figure
D).
4
Labeling with the FB1 or the FB6 probe in oxidative
conditions
allows to pull-down the cell surfaceome. (A) Volcano plot of the protein
intensities between the experimental conditions FB1 (left), FB6 (right),
and control (DMSO), in the presence of NBS (
n
= 3
for each condition). One out of four independent experiments is shown.
(B) Bubble plot for GO cellular component enrichment analysis of the
significant proteins pulled down with FB1. Top 10 terms and number
of genes associated with the terms are indicated.
y
-axis: GO terms;
x
-axis: protein fold-change. The
size of each circle represents the number of proteins. The hue of
the circles symbolizes the -log
10
(FDR) value. (C) Overlap
of the total number of proteins identified in the FB1 and FB6 pull-downs.
(D) Scatter plot of the 1119 proteins commonly identified in the FB1
and FB6 pull-downs. (E) Volcano plot comparing the intensities of
the proteins identified by LC–MS/MS in the pull-downs of sulfo-NHS-biotin
or FB1 (
n
= 3 for each condition). (F) Frequency
distribution and best-fit Gaussian distribution of normalized iBAQ
intensity values within FB1 and sulfo-NHS-biotin replicate between
the enriched proteins. FB1 total peak area: 243.9 (red) and 113.4
(gray); sulfo-NHS-biotin total peak area: 260.7 (red) and 212.8 (gray).
(G) Scatter plot of the CV of the proteins identified in at least
two replicates of the FB1, FB6, and sulfo-NHS-biotin pull-downs. Median
± 95% CI is indicated: FB1 = 14.3; FB6 = 13.77; and sulfo-NHS-biotin
= 15.91. In the volcano plots, the
x
-axis represents
the log
2
fold-change in protein abundance, while the
y
-axis shows statistical significance as -log
10
(p-value). Proteins annotated as surface-associated using the CIRFESS
surfaceome prediction tool are color-coded. Selected proteins with
the most significant up-regulation upon indicated labeling are highlighted.
*
p
< 0.05; ***
p
< 0.001.
NHS-esters of biotin are widely used to label and
isolate cell
surface proteins. However, the proteomic data sets generally exhibit
a high number of nonspecific intracellular proteins.
Given that FB1 is more effective in enriching cell surface
proteins than FB6, we compared FB1 with sulfo-NHS-biotin for cell
surface labeling. Living cells were labeled with similar concentrations
of both compounds, and biotin pull-downs were performed in similar
conditions as indicated above. A total of 783 proteins were found
significantly enriched in the sulfo-NHS-biotin pull-down compared
with the control (
Figure S25
A and
Table S8
), indicating that sulfo-NHS-biotin leads
to pulling down more proteins than FB compounds. From the enriched
proteins, 35% were annotated as surface proteins by the CIRFESS tool
(
Figure S25
A and
Table S8
). However, upon comparing the FB1 and sulfo-NHS-biotin proteomes,
proteins annotated to the intracellular space were found enriched
in the sulfo-NHS-biotin pull-down (
Figure
E). Conversely, hierarchical clustering of
the abundance of the significant proteins showed a cluster of proteins
in the FB1 group enriched in plasma membrane- and cell-surface-related
GO terms (
Figure S25
B). We further evaluated
the distribution of the absolute intensities of intracellular and
cell surface-related proteins within the FB1 and sulfo-NHS-biotin
pull-downs. For this, we plotted their iBAQ values as proxies of absolute
protein intensities.
The distribution
of iBAQ values for the enriched proteins revealed no significant differences
in the number and intensities of surface-related proteins between
FB1 and sulfo-NHS-biotin data sets (
Figure
F). However, the number and intensity levels
of intracellular proteins in the FB1 condition (log
10
(median)
= 0.25) were significantly lower than those in the sulfo-NHS-biotin
condition (log
10
(median) = 0.36) (
p-
value
= 0.02) (
Figure
F).
Considering both frequencies and intensities, intracellular proteins
constitute 30% and 44% of the FB1 and sulfo-NHS-biotin proteomes,
respectively. All of this indicates that the FB1 compound outperforms
sulfo-NHS-biotin by enriching less intracellular proteins. This is
likely due to the fact that the reactivity of the furan compounds
relies on oxidation, which prevents the capture of intracellular proteins
that reside in a reducing environment. We also assessed the variability
of the pull-down assays by comparing the coefficient of variation
(CV) of the proteins enriched in three replicates of FB1, FB6 and
sulfo-NHS-biotin labeled cells. The median CV for the sulfo-NHS-biotin
(15.91%) is significantly higher than the median CV for FB1 (14.30%)
and FB6 (13.77%) probes, with no significant difference between FB1
and FB6 (
Figure
G).
Furthermore, the cumulative CV below 20% was 76.95%, 78.28% and 69.16%
for the proteins from FB1, FB6 and sulfo-NHS-biotin, respectively
(data not shown).
We next explored whether the furan cross-linking
method could detect
differences in the surfaceome of different cell lines. First, we labeled
in vivo the nontumorigenic human breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10A
with the FB1 probe. The staining pattern was consistent with a surface
labeling, similarly to the one in MCF-7 cells (
Figure S26
). Second, we profiled the cell surface proteome
of MCF-10A cells and explored its difference with that of MCF-7 cells.
To gain a more comprehensive view of the surface proteome, we proceeded
with Data-Independent-Acquisition (DIA) analysis which offers depth
of coverage. In total, 687 unique surface proteins were pulled down
by FB1, with 551 and 456 surface proteins pulled down in the MCF-7
and MCF-10A data sets, respectively (
Figure S27
,
Tables S9, and S10
). From those, 481
and 405 proteins were significantly enriched in the MCF-7 and MCF-10
pull-downs, with 71 and 80% of these proteins exclusively identified
in the FB1 pull-downs and not in the controls of the MCF-7 and MCF-10
cells (
Tables S9 and S10
). Following normalization,
principal component analysis (PCA) of the control and FB1 pull-downs
showed that data clustered by cell line, suggesting that the FB1 pull-down
captured the heterogeneity of the cells’ protein profiles (
Figure
A). The first two principal components (PC1 and PC2) accounted
for 51,9% of the total variance. Furthermore, FB1 pull-down replicates
clustered tightly, indicating minimal variability between replicates.
Differential expression analysis between the two cell lines revealed
that 67% of the proteins pulled down from both data sets (1,610 proteins
out of 2,390 total) showed significant difference in protein intensities
across the cell lines (
Figure
B,
Table S11
). Notably, 312 surface
proteins showed strong up-regulation in MCF-7 cells. Proteins involved
in cell adhesion such as the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (
EPCAM
) and E-cadherin (
CDH1
), the fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (
FGFR2
), and members of
the
ERBB
receptor tyrosine kinase family are among
the most upregulated proteins identified in the surface of MCF-7 cells.
Conversely, cadherins such as
CDH2
,
CDH4
,
CDH10
and
CDH13
were not detected
in the MCF-7 cell surface and found to be identified in MCF-10A (
Figure
B).
5
FB1 pull-down of MCF-7
and MCF-10A surfaceomes. (A) Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) plot of 2,496 proteins identified in at least three
replicates from one of the four groups. (B) Volcano plot of the protein
intensities pulled down with FB1 in the presence of NBS, comparing
the experimental conditions of MCF-7 and MCF-10A (
n
= 4 for each condition). Data from one out of two independent experiments
are shown. Proteins with a high fold-change and that belong to any
of the three clusters shown in (D) are highlighted. The plot displays
the log
2
(fold-change) (
x
-axis) versus
the significance (−log
10
(
p
-value))
(
y
-axis) of the identified proteins. Red symbols
indicate surface proteins predicted by the CIRFESS tool while gray
symbols represent nonpredicted surface proteins. (C) Bubble plot for
GO and keywords enrichment analysis of the surface proteins enriched
in the MCF-7 pull-down. Top terms and number of genes associated with
these terms are indicated.
y
-axis: GO terms;
x
-axis: protein fold-change. The size of each circle corresponds
to the number of proteins, and the hue of the circles represents the
-log
10
(FDR) value. (D, G) Cluster analysis of the surface
proteins enriched in the MCF-7 (D) and MCF-10A (G) using STRING. The
identified clusters are indicated. The solid and dot lines indicate
connection within the same and different cluster, respectively. The
line width reflects the strength of the interaction, with combined
scores ranging from 0.4 (thin line, medium confidence) to 0.9 (thicker
line, highest confidence). Nodes with darker colors indicate proteins
uniquely identified in the indicated cell line. (E) Venn diagram showing
the total number of surface proteins identified in MCF-10A cells using
FB1 and hydrazide-based chemistry, as published in Ye et al.
(F) Bubble plot for GO and keywords enrichment
analysis of the surface proteins enriched in the MCF-10A pull-down.
Functional enrichment and network analysis of the
312 surface proteins
enriched in MCF-7 cells revealed biological “programs”
relevant to cancer cell signaling and metastasis (
Figure
C). GO term enrichment analysis
revealed three significantly enriched clusters: “transmembrane
receptor protein tyrosine kinase activity”, “ephrin
receptor signaling pathway”, and “positive regulation
of cellular extravasation” (
Figure
D). Within the network, proteins associated
with “transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase activity”
formed a tightly connected cluster, with 72.9% of protein neighbors
linked to another. Key nodes within this cluster included
EGFR
,
ERBB2/3/4
,
FGFR2/4
and
IGF1R
, all known mediators of growth factor
signaling, and commonly overexpressed in breast cancer.
A second cluster, enriched in “ephrin
receptor signaling pathway”, with a clustering coefficient
of 100%, encompassed receptors such as
EPHA2
,
EPHB4
and their ligands
EFNA1–4
.
Ephrin receptors and ligands are often dysregulated in cancer cells
compared with noncancer tissues.
The
third cluster, enriched in proteins associated with cellular extravasation,
included
ICAM
,
CD44
and
MMP-15
and showed a clustering coefficient of 86%.
Fifty-six percent of surface glycoproteins captured by hydrazide-based
chemistry from MCF-10A
were also enriched
in our FB1 pull-down (
Table S12
,
Figure
E). GO term and network
analyses of the MCF-10A surface proteins revealed an enrichment of
cell adhesion-related proteins, with integrin- and cadherin-related
terms among the most abundant (
Figure
F). The “cell adhesion molecular binding”
term revealed 40 proteins highly connected in two clusters: integrins
and the catenin complex, with 87% and 84% connectivity between neighbors,
respectively (
Figure
G). A third cluster was enriched in proteins containing a Phenylalanine-Phenylalanine
Acidic Tail (PPAT) motif. These proteins play key roles in regulating
membrane contact sites between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
other cellular membranes, including the plasma membrane.
4
Conclusions
Here, we designed and synthesized
six furan-biotin probes (FB1-FB6)
that effectively label cell surface proteins. Oxidation of the furan
moieties was required for efficient cell surface protein labeling.
Among the six compounds tested, FB1 exhibited the highest staining
intensity and was found to be the most efficient in isolating surface
proteins with minimal contamination of cytoplasmic proteins. Moreover,
a comparison with conventional sulfo-NHS-biotin revealed that FB1
outperforms the NHS-ester as it led to lower nonspecific labeling
of intracellular proteins. Analysis of two distinct cell lines–cancerous
(MCF-7) and noncancerous (MCF-10A)–highlighted the sensitivity
of the furan probe to profile different cell lines. The oxidation-dependency
of furan compounds render them particularly valuable for cell surface
protein labeling. Our work provides not only a robust method for profiling
cell surface proteins, but also opens new avenues for unbiased, high-specificity
proteomic studies of cell surface dynamics under oxidative conditions.
Further efforts will be focused on further optimizing FB1 to enhance
specificity and minimize potential off-target effects.
Supplementary Material