1
Introduction
Protein O-linked β-
N
-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc)
modification (O-GlcNAcylation) is a dynamic and essential post-translational
modification (PTM) that regulates a broad range of cellular processes
including gene expression, signal transduction, and cell cycle
−
(
Figure
A). Interestingly,
the regulation of O-GlcNAcylation is orchestrated by a single pair
of human enzymes: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), which transfers a single
sugar
N
-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from the sugar
donor, UDP-GlcNAc, to serine and threonine residues of protein substrates;
and O-GlcNAcase (OGA), which removes the O-GlcNAc modification.
−
Unlike classical glycosylation, which is primarily found on membrane/secreted
proteins and involved in protein folding and trafficking, O-GlcNAcylation
operates mostly within the intracellular environment (e.g., nucleus,
cytoplasm, and mitochondria) and affects protein’s activity,
stability, localization, and interaction networks.
−
This single pair of O-GlcNAc
cycling enzymes, OGT and OGA, modify thousands of protein substrates
without a conserved sequence motif at the O-GlcNAc modification sites.
The mechanisms of these enzymes in substrate
recognition and functional regulation have been long-standing mysteries
in the field and have become popular areas of investigation.
−
Another unique feature of O-GlcNAcylation is its reversibility,
allowing for fine-tuning cellular processes in response to external
and internal stimuli, underscoring its critical role in maintaining
cellular homeostasis.
,
These O-GlcNAc events reflect
a delicate balance between the enzymatic activities of OGT and OGA,
impacting nearly every aspect of cellular biology and human health
including immune response and organ functions. It is therefore not
surprising that dysregulation of O-GlcNAc levels is correlated with
the development of many diseases such as cancer, diabetes, neurodegeneration,
and cardiovascular disorders.
−
Hence, a deeper understanding of OGT and OGA, including their protein
structures, substrate recognition, and functional regulation, is critical
for dissecting disease mechanisms and developing novel modulators
for potential therapeutic applications.
1
A
. Reversible
protein O-GlcNAcylation catalyzed by
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and O-GlcNAcase (OGA).
B
.
(Top) Domain architecture of human OGT and the crystallization construct
OGT
4.5
. (Bottom) OGT dimer modeled from cryo-EM structure
(PDB
7YEA
).
C
. Comparison of OGT conformations in apo form (cyan) and
OGA-bound complex (orange). (Left) OGT monomer is shown. (Right) OGT
dimer is shown. Alignment regions are highlighted by dashed circles.
D
. The relative positions of O-GlcNAcylation of residue S399
and the DFP motif on OGT as predicted by Alphafold3 (ref
).
In the past decade, substantial advancement has
been made in deciphering
the structural and functional properties of OGT and OGA.
,
−
However, obtaining a complete understanding remains challenging.
OGT and OGA have evolved unique structural features that contribute
to their substrate recognition and functional regulation. This allows
these essential enzymes to bind a wide variety of substrate and nonsubstrate
proteins, and carry out their multifaceted cellular roles with remarkable
functional plasticity that is not yet completely understood. Given
the broad range of substrates and functions of O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes,
the principles governing their substrate recognition and functional
regulation could be complex and go beyond their active sites.
Based on the current knowledge of the structure–function
relationship discovered from us and other groups, we propose a perspective
that the catalytic domain of each OGT/OGA enzyme works in concert
with structured non-catalytic domains and flexible regions within
the enzyme to regulate ligand binding and functional plasticity. In
this Account, we will discuss each OGT and OGA enzyme from three main
aspects: briefly summarize the field’s understanding of their
protein structures and functional regulation, highlight recently discovered
novel allosteric sites and regulatory mechanisms arising from structural,
biochemical, and post-translational modification (PTM) studies, and
describe a few representative chemical biology tools for investigating
their structures and functions. Lastly, we will discuss potential
research directions to advance our understanding of the regulatory
mechanisms of O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes and the implications of related
knowledge in developing novel modulators and potential therapeutics.
2
O-GlcNAc Transferase (OGT)
2.1
A Brief Overview of O-GlcNAc Transferase (OGT)
OGT is a multidomain enzyme that catalyzes the O-GlcNAcylation
on thousands of proteins.
This enzyme
is composed of an N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain
and a C-terminal catalytic region, which is split into two catalytic
lobes (N-Cat and C-Cat) by a unique intervening domain (Int-D)
(
Figure
B). Three isoforms of OGT with varying numbers of TPRs have
been identified: nucleocytoplasmic OGT (ncOGT) with 13.5 TPRs, mitochondrial
OGT (mOGT) with 9 TPRs, and short OGT (sOGT) with 2.5 TPRs.
Since ncOGT is the most abundant and best characterized
isoform with demonstrated significance in a broad range of cellular
processes, this Account will focus on the ncOGT isoform (termed “OGT”
hereafter). Prior structural studies have shown that the TPR domain
of OGT folds into a super helical structure and possesses a series
of asparagine residues (termed “asparagine ladder”)
aligning inside the TPR lumen.
Mediated
by the asparagine ladder, the TPR domain can accommodate substrates
ranging from short peptides to flexible regions of large proteins.
This ladder binds to substrates mainly through
backbone interactions, acting as a general scaffold for OGT–protein
interactions and substrate recognition.
−
Following biochemical and mass
spectrometry (MS) studies further discovered that a few residues in
the TPR lumen display differential roles in binding to distinct protein
substrates and may also contribute to OGT’s substrate specificity
(see below).
,
Intriguingly, the TPR domain
is essential for OGT dimerization, which can enhance the enzymatic
activity and substrate diversity. The initial view of the catalytic
region of OGT was obtained from the crystal structures of truncated
OGT (called OGT
4.5
containing 4.5 TPRs,
Figure
B) in apo form and in complex
with sugar donor (UDP-GlcNAc) and a peptide substrate.
These structures revealed that UDP-GlcNAc binds
specifically to a few residues in the OGT active site, while the peptide
substrate lies on top of the sugar donor, making primary backbone
interactions with OGT active site residues.
This binding mode explains the absence of a consensus sequence motif
at the O-GlcNAc modification sites. Working in concert with the TPR
domain scaffold, OGT’s catalytic domain can modify serine and
threonine residues across a wide array of substrate proteins and peptides.
Surprisingly, a novel regulatory site has been recently discovered
in the OGT’s intervening domain (Int-D).
,
This cryptic domain separates OGT’s catalytic region into
two lobes (N-Cat and C-Cat,
Figure
B) and is uniquely found in metazoan OGTs. While Int-D
has been hypothesized to influence OGT’s cellular localization,
substrate selection, and regulatory factor binding, direct experimental
evidence has only recently emerged (see below). These exciting new
discoveries show that OGT can recognize specific peptide motifs through
the novel regulatory site in the Int-D, which plays critical roles
in substrate/nonsubstrate protein binding, O-GlcNAc regulation, cell
metabolism, and nutrient sensing functions of OGT, underscoring its
potential as a functional hotspot for future chemical biology development.
2.2
The Structural Flexibility of OGT
While the structures of majority part of the TPR domain (containing
11.5 TPRs) and a truncated OGT (OGT
4.5
) were solved by
X-ray crystallography over a decade ago,
,
the structure of full-length OGT was only resolved recently thanks
to the advancement of cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM).
This structure confirmed the dimerization of
OGT mediated by the TPR domain. More recently, a cryo-EM structure
of full-length OGT in complex with an OGA polypeptide shows that substrate-bound
OGT adopts a different conformation from its apo form
(
Figure
C), illustrating the structural flexibility of TPR. Another interesting
observation from this complex structure is that the catalytic domains
of dimeric OGT converge, while the N-terminal TPR repeats shift apart
(
Figure
C). This motion
indicates the elastic and dynamic nature of the TPR superhelix, even
within OGT’s generally structured architecture. Moreover, the
crystal structures of OGT
4.5
in complex with different
ligands revealed hinge-like movements between the TPR and catalytic
region.
This finding was also supported
by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
More recently, simulation studies further suggest that the TPR domain
functions as an elastic nanospring, with single-point mutations capable
of altering its global dynamics.
Taken
together, the flexibility of OGT may function as an additional layer
of regulation for substrate recognition, and the ample conformational
space enables accommodation for a broad range of substrates. In the
future, it would be interesting to explore if the different OGT conformations
are a consequence of ligand binding via conformational selection or
an induced-fit mechanism, which underlies many biological processes.
Integrating structural and biochemical data with molecular modeling
is promising to derive structural and dynamic models of how substrates
are recognized and processed by OGT. This will provide critical information
to understand how OGT regulates its activity toward thousands of protein
substrates to achieve selectivity.
2.3
Post-translational Modifications (PTMs) of
OGT
Diverse post-translational modifications (PTMs) have
been identified on OGT under various conditions and may regulate the
cellular localization and functional activities of this essential
enzyme.
,
Nonetheless, the structural consequences
of many PTMs on OGT and the exact mechanisms by which they affect
function remain underexplored. Here, we will discuss the PTMs that
have been studied in greater detail in this context. First, OGT can
install the O-GlcNAc modification on its S399 residue, which has been
shown to enhance the nuclear localization of OGT.
Structural analysis shows that OGT S399 resides in a loop
between two helices near the DFP region (residues 461–463)
(
Figure
D). It is
likely that the O-GlcNAcylation of S399 exposes the DFP region of
OGT, promoting its interaction with importin α5 for nuclear
transport. In addition to O-GlcNAcylation, OGT can be phosphorylated
by a few different kinases. The phosphorylation of OGT T444 residue
by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) modulates OGT’s catalytic
activity, subcellular distribution and substrate specificity.
This phosphorylation affects O-GlcNAc dynamics
and downstream signaling (e.g., mTORC1 activation and AMPK suppression),
linking nutrient sensing to metabolic regulation. Under cold stress,
the protein kinase PERK phosphorylates OGT, despite that the specific
sites have not been identified.
This
PERK-phosphorylated OGT demonstrated enhanced activity to glycosylate
TOM70 on its S94 residue. The O-GlcNAcylation of TOM70 directly enhances
MIC19 protein import into the mitochondria and promotes cristae formation
and respiration during stress adaptation. In another example, GSK3β
phosphorylates OGT at serine residues S3 and S4, enhancing its enzymatic
activity.
Despite that the mechanism
remains unclear, this finding was supported by mutational studies
in which alanine substitutions at OGT S3 and S4 residues (S3A/S4A)
prevented activity enhancement, while aspartate substitutions (S3D/S4D,
mimicking phosphorylation) increased OGT activity. Although aspartate
and glutamate mutations have been widely used as phospho-mimetics
to investigate the roles of this modification, caution should be applied
because in some cases these simple mutations cannot retain the same
function as phosphorylation.
−
To date, the crosstalk between
O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation has been extensively studied for
some proteins but not for OGT itself. This could be an interesting
topic for future investigation. Besides O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation,
other post-translational modifications have also been found on OGT,
including acetylation and ubiquitination.
Of particular interest, a recent study reported that FBXO31 induced
ubiquitination and degradation of OGT protein, which can regulate
O-GlcNAc homeostasis.
Future studies
are expected to reveal new insights into additional PTMs on OGT.
2.4
Chemical Biology Tools for OGT
Over
the past few years, many chemical biology tools have been developed
for OGT, which have been reviewed in excellent reports.
−
Below, we will highlight a few representative developments that
accelerate the investigation of OGT’s structure and function.
OGT plays crucial roles in human health and disease, but its substrate
recognition remains poorly understood. To help address this challenge,
our lab reported a series of conceptually novel chemical tools (called
GlcNAc Electrophilic Probes or GEPs) that allow rapid mapping of key
structural features of OGT for substrate recognition.
,
Our rational GEP design was inspired by the observation of a unique
cysteine residue (C917), in the OGT active site, in close proximity
to the
N
-acetyl group of UDP-GlcNAc (PDB
4GZ5
). Our GEPs contain
a suitable electrophilic functionality (e.g., GEP1 in
Figure
A) that can react with the
nucleophilic side chain of OGT C917, while retaining the ability to
O-GlcNAcylate substrates similarly to the native sugar donor UDP-GlcNAc
(PDB
5VIF
).
By introducing an azide handle to GEP1, the new probe (GEP1A) enables
rapid detection of modified proteins (OGT and its substrate proteins)
through a click chemistry-based fluorescence assay, allowing for a
direct readout of altered substrate protein binding. Leveraging this
unique assay, we performed a systematic analysis of the OGT TPR domain
and discovered a number of important residues.
Interestingly, distinct protein substrates (e.g., Nup62
and OGA) demonstrated differential preferences for TPR residues, suggesting
specificity and plasticity of OGT’s substrate protein binding,
which requires further investigation. More importantly, our GEPs help
address the challenge of genuine OGT substrate identification for
transient or weak interactors. Remarkably, we found that GEP1 (or
GEP1A) can cross-link OGT in situ with a variety of peptide and protein
substrates
(e.g., PDB
5VIE
), which are compatible
with downstream biochemical, quantitative LC-MS/MS and structural
analyses (
Figure
A).
This unique cross-linking approach depends on OGT’s catalytic
activity and is expected to be more specific than many other reported
methods, like photo-cross-linking. This is especially important considering
that a few other enzymes, like EGF domain-specific O-GlcNAc transferase
(EOGT)
,
and protein GREB1 (ref
.), have been recently
reported to catalyze O-GlcNAcylation on proteins using OGT’s
sugar donor, UDP-GlcNAc. Taken together, GEPs provide a set of powerful
tools to accelerate the characterization of OGT-substrate binding
and recognition. Another challenge in studying the role of OGT has
been the paucity of inhibitors with sufficient potency and selectivity
for cellular applications. Due to the high cellular concentration
of UDP-GlcNAc (hundreds of micromolar range), many reversible active-site
inhibitors of OGT are rendered less effective. Built on our successful
targeting of OGT with GEPs, we developed a family of cell-permeable
covalent inhibitors (
Figure
B).
These inhibitors demonstrated
significantly higher inhibition efficiency compared to reversible
OGT inhibitors. More interestingly, we found that OGT was inhibited
in cells with minimal effect on the functionally similar glycosyltransferase,
EOGT, making this class of inhibitors an invaluable tool for targeting
OGT active-site function in cells.
2
A
. Representative GlcNAc
Electrophilic Probes (GEPs)
that can be applied to cross-link OGT with its substrates during the
sugar transferring process and to investigate OGT–substrate
binding modes.
B
. Targeted covalent inhibitor of OGT.
C
. Crystal structure of OGT-UDP-SMG9 peptide illustrates a
conserved peptide motif binding to OGT Int-D (yellow) (PDB
8FE7
).
D
. Inhibitory macrocyclic peptides targeting the TPR domain of OGT.
E
. Representative chemical biology tools targeting OGT for
spatiotemporal control of O-GlcNAcylation inside of cells. Symbol
G in pink hexagon: O-GlcNAcylation; t: time.
Previous studies from our group and others suggest
that regions
outside of OGT’s active site play critical roles in substrate
binding, protein–protein interactions (PPIs), and cellular
translocalization, to name a few.
,
,
,
,
However, the specific sites of interaction modulating their functions
remain largely undefined. Moreover, it is unclear if the nutrient
sensing role of OGT relies solely on the catalytic site or an interplay
between catalytic and non-catalytic regions. Further, it has been
reported that the non-catalytic roles of OGT are necessary for mammalian
cell proliferation, but the mechanisms remain unknown.
Growing evidence suggests significant, previously
unidentified roles for regions outside of the OGT’s active
site. This encouraged us to explore the potential existence of remote
binding sites for OGT interacting with substrate and nonsubstrate
proteins. OGT is a unique glycosyltransferase that contains TPRs,
a PPI scaffolding domain. Data from our group and others support that
some proteins require TPR interactions for optimal O-GlcNAcylation,
while other OGT substrates make minimal or partial TPR contact, suggesting
additional, novel OGT binding sites that have not yet been investigated.
,
,
Indeed, another notable feature
of OGT is the Int-D (
Figure
B), whose function remains elusive, that is highly conserved
in vertebrates, but its unique structural fold is not found in any
other proteins. In a collaborative study, we have applied a Proteomic
Peptide Phage Display (ProP-PD) screening technique and identified
a novel peptide motif PxYx­[I/L] interacting with OGT.
This motif exists in diverse human proteins, representing
the first OGT specific short linear motif (SLiM) within the intrinsically
disordered regions (IDRs) of binding proteins. Meanwhile, phage display
with a random peptide library discovered a similar consensus sequence
[Y/F]­xPxYx­[I/M/F] binding to OGT.
Our
crystal structures further reveal that the motif containing peptides
bind to the OGT Int-D, distal from the active site (
Figure
C), providing the first direct
evidence for the biological roles of this cryptic Int-D domain and
revealing a novel OGT regulatory site. In the crystal structure of
OGT
4.5
in complex with an SMG9 peptide containing the motif,
we found that the Int-D pocket contains several well-conserved residues
in vertebrates, such as I734, I787, and N791 which make critical interactions
with the SMG9 peptide in the structure (PDB
8FE7
). Mutagenesis further
validated the novel binding mode. Moreover, mutation of SMG9 at the
motif Y residue, corresponding to Y147F mutation in the SMG9 protein,
significantly reduced the interaction of the SMG9 peptide with OGT.
SMG9 protein is a critical player in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay
(NMD), targeting premature stop codon-containing mRNAs for rapid degradation.
It is essential for mammalian embryonic and
brain development, as well as modulation of the stress response.
It has been reported that the SMG9 protein contains
a single major O-GlcNAcylation site on residue T114, only 30 aa upstream
of the Int-D binding motif. Remarkably, structure-informed mutation
of OGT-N791A or SMG9-Y147F significantly impeded their association
and O-GlcNAcylation of the SMG9 protein. A working model is that OGT
TPRs may serve as a general scaffold for various protein partners,
while the Int-D may serve as an anchor point for specific interactions
with proteins via a binding motif, orienting appropriate Ser/Thr residue
in the active site for O-GlcNAcylation. Interestingly, the catalytic
activities of wild-type (WT) OGT and the N791A mutant are comparable,
as evaluated using the well characterized CKII peptide substrate in
vitro.
These results, along with cellular
studies, consistently support that the Int-D binding site does not
affect OGT’s intrinsic catalytic activity, but instead regulates
OGT-protein interactions and O-GlcNAcylation of OGT substrates like
SMG9. More intriguingly, the SMG9 Y147 residue is a major phosphorylation
site, which our structure-guided molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
predicted would abolish interaction with OGT. Indeed, phosphorylation
of Y147 in the motif of SMG9 disrupted its interaction with OGT in
vitro.
Since OGT has been proposed as
a critical “nutrient sensor”,
,
we tested global O-GlcNAcylation at different nutrient levels from
cells that inducibly express WT OGT or the N791A mutant (abolishes
motif binding to Int-D). In high nutrient conditions, both WT OGT
and N791A mutant cells demonstrated similar levels of cellular O-GlcNAcylation.
Strikingly, in low nutrient conditions, the N791A mutant cells failed
to promptly downregulate O-GlcNAcylation after 48 h of nutrient starvation,
despite similar OGT and OGA protein levels in both cells.
Notably, we detected significantly lower levels
of lactate production in N791A mutant cells with similar growth rates
as WT OGT cells, supporting that the OGT Int-D site regulates glucose
metabolism in cells. Collectively, these results suggest that the
OGT Int-D site regulates cellular response to nutrient stress, but
the molecular mechanisms require further investigation. Exciting discoveries
of the OGT TPR and Int-D as functional regulators will promote the
development of novel chemical tools to target these non-catalytic
regions for site-specific modulation. As an example, highly potent
macrocyclic peptides targeting the OGT TPR domain have been recently
identified through a random nonstandard peptides integrated discovery
(RaPID) system (
Figure
D).
Further optimization of these macrocyclic
peptides and new probe development for the Int-D can potentially lead
to novel allosteric modulators to investigate OGT functions.
Spatial and temporal control of OGT function is essential for understanding
its role in various cellular processes. Recent developments have provided
valuable tools to help achieve this goal (
Figure
E). For instance, aptamers targeting OGT’s
TPR region have been identified from a Systematic Evolution of Ligands
by EXponential Enrichment (SELEX) screening platform.
A dual aptamer with two functional domains, one binding
to OGT and the other binding to a substrate protein, enables targeted
O-GlcNAcylation of that specific substrate. Another recent strategy
for targeted O-GlcNAcylation is the development of heterobifunctional
small molecules called O-GlcNAcylation TArgeting Chimeras (OGTACs).
In this strategy, FKBP12
F36V
is fused
to OGT as a binding handle, and a small molecule ligand of FKBP12
F36V
is linked with another small molecule ligand of the targeted
OGT protein substrate(s). The OGTAC brings together OGT and its substrates
to induce protein-specific O-GlcNAcylation in cells. Aside from aptamers
and small molecules, engineered OGT through fusion to a nanobody was
also applied to targeted O-GlcNAcylation.
The nanobody recognizes the substrate and brings OGT in proximity
to induce O-GlcNAcylation. In a different strategy, a photoactivatable
OGT was constructed through a genetic codon expansion technique by
replacing an essential catalytic lysine (K842) with a genetically
encoded photocaged lysine analog.
Upon
near UV (365 nm) irradiation, the protecting group on K842 was released
and exposed the caged OGT, enabling its catalytic function. This strategy
showed that activation of OGT could reverse the morphological contraction
of fibroblasts, linking dynamic O-GlcNAcylation to cellular contractile
responses. Through engineering a short form of OGT, which is located
in the cytosol, this photoactivatable method demonstrated its spatial
activation at a subcellular level. More recently, an Opto-OGT is created
by fusing a full-length human OGT with mCherry and the photosensitive
cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) domain.
In the
dark, CRY2 is proposed to sterically hinder the UDP-GlcNAc substrate
binding site of OGT. Upon exposure to blue light, CRY2 undergoes conformational
changes and oligomerizes, thereby exposing OGT and permitting substrate
access. Opto-OGT is demonstrated to be reversible, tunable, and robust
through engineering. By coupling Opto-OGT with targeting motifs via
the heterodimerization system between CRY2 and its interaction partner
CIBN, OGT is redirected to specific subcellular locations such as
the mitochondria and plasma membrane. Recently, the exceptional binding
affinity of HCF-1 peptide (a natural ligand of OGT) has been leveraged
to develop a degradable and switchable OGT inhibitor for cellular
use.
Upon doxycycline induced expression
of a fluorescently tagged HCF-1 peptide variant (HCF3R-AAA peptide
fused with FKBP12
F36V
), OGT’s activity can be inhibited
by this engineered peptide. Interestingly, the inhibition effect can
be reversed by the treatment of dTAGV-1, which is a degrader targeting
the FKBP12
F36V
fused HCF3R-AAA peptide. This switchable
system can be used to understand the dynamic regulation of O-GlcNAc
levels. Taken together, these novel chemical biology tools represent
significant advancements in interrogating and manipulating the specific
interactions and functions of OGT in vitro and in cells.
−
3
O-GlcNAcase (OGA)
3.1
A Brief Overview of O-GlcNAcase (OGA)
O-GlcNAcase (OGA), the sole enzyme that removes O-GlcNAc modifications,
consists of multiple domains: an N-terminal catalytic domain, a stalk
domain, and a C-terminal pseudo histone acetyltransferase (pHAT) domain
(
Figure
A). Two main isoforms of OGA have been identified: full-length
OGA (916 aa) and a short OGA (677 aa) lacking the pHAT domain.
This Account will focus on the more abundant
isoform, full-length OGA, and highlight the advances in its structural
studies to promote chemical biology developments. Given the variety
of important biological functions and diversity of OGA substrates,
elucidating OGA’s structure, understanding how different protein
substrates bind OGA, identifying what the critical substrate recognition
elements are, and determining if interactions can be modulated specifically
is paramount. The existence of multiple intrinsically disordered regions
(IDRs, including the N-terminal tail (1–59 aa), the stalk domain
loop (400–552 aa), and the loop bridging the stalk domain and
pHAT domain (705–715 aa)) poses a significant challenge for
characterization of the full-length OGA structure. We and others have
determined the X-ray crystal structures of truncated OGA constructs
(e.g., OGA
cryst
in
Figure
A,B), which comprise the catalytic and stalk domains
without the IDRs.
−
These structures offer the first view of human OGA,
providing a model to elucidate OGA structural features for catalysis
and substrate recognition. OGA’s catalytic site folds into
a classic (β/α)
8
-barrel (eight-stranded parallel
β-sheet core mainly surrounded by eight α-helices), which
forms a deep pocket for GlcNAc binding and hydrolysis. The OGA stalk
domain folds into an α-helix bundle. Distinct from many bacterial
OGA homologues in the GH84 family, human OGA forms an arm-in-arm dimer
with the stalk domain of one monomer covering the catalytic domain
of the other, forming a cleft for potential substrate/protein binding.
Our structural analyses of OGA
cryst
in complex with different
O-GlcNAcylated peptides further revealed unique substrate binding
modes
,
(
Figure
B). These structures illustrate that GlcNAc binding
in the catalytic pocket is highly conserved, while the peptide part
of the O-GlcNAcylated substrates can potentially make different interactions
with OGA stalk domain residues, contributing to OGA’s substrate
recognition and discrimination. These OGA structural complexes with
distinct glycopeptides, along with the growing evidence from biochemical
and cellular studies, suggest that in addition to the catalytic site,
the non-catalytic domains (e.g., stalk domain) can also contribute
to OGA substrate recognition. This new perspective is further supported
by our recent study on a cancer-derived mutant of OGA.
We found that a single mutation (S652F) on the
non-catalytic stalk domain of OGA dysregulated its interaction with
a set of specific substrate and nonsubstrate proteins. One of the
most dysregulated substrates is PDZ and LIM domain protein 7 (PDLIM7).
Interestingly, compared to the WT enzyme, the OGA mutant more favorably
removed the O-GlcNAc modification from PDLIM7 protein, significantly
reduced the level of p53 tumor suppressor and elevated actin-rich
membrane protrusions to promote cancer cell motility and aggressiveness.
These findings illuminate the critical role
of a stalk domain mutation in dysregulating OGA’s substrate
specificity to promote cell malignant progression, opening new opportunities
for chemical biology development in anticancer research. More recently,
two studies have reported the cryo-EM structures of a human OGA dimer
containing pHAT domains: one is full-length OGA,
while the other is a multidomain OGA lacking the IDR spanning
residues 397–535 (ref
.). Although a displaced helix was observed on one of the
full-length OGA chains in the cryo-EM structure,
in both studies, the positioning of catalytic residues
and the overall fold of the catalytic and stalk domains of each OGA
monomer closely resembles that of the published truncated OGA crystal
structures (e.g., PDB
5VVO
). While a high-resolution structure of the human OGA
pHAT domain was not attained, these cryo-EM data consistently support
the substantial flexibility of pHAT domains relative to the catalytic-stalk
dimer, providing novel insights into OGA’s substrate recognition
and functional regulation (see below).
3
A
. Domain
architecture of human O-GlcNAcase (OGA)
and a crystallization construct (OGA
cryst
).
B
. The crystal structure of OGA
cryst
dimer in complex with
O-GlcNAcylated p53 peptide substrate (PDB
5UN8
). The catalytic and stalk domains of
one OGA
cryst
monomer are colored in blue and orange, respectively,
while the sister OGA
cryst
monomer is shown in gray. The
O-GlcNAcylated p53 peptide is colored in pink (GlcNAc) and green (peptide).
C
. Full-length OGA model rebuilt from an AlphaFold3 prediction
(ref
).
D
. Superimposition of two different crystal structures of OGA catalytic-stalk
domain dimers (Forest: apo form (PDB
5TKE
); Wheat: small molecule inhibitor bound
form (PDB
9BA8
)).
E
. Representative chemical biology tools targeting
OGA for spatiotemporal O-GlcNAc hydrolysis. Sub: substrate; Nb: nanobody;
4-HT: 4-hydroxytamoxifen.
3.2
The Structural Flexibility of OGA
While full-length OGA has been investigated structurally,
,
the high-resolution model is currently only accessible by prediction
(
Figure
C). Previously
reported crystal structures of truncated OGA (e.g., OGA
cryst
in
Figure
B) and
their glycopeptide complexes typically display a partially “open
scissor” shaped dimer conformation.
−
It was hypothesized
that the OGA protein may possess some flexibility to alter (e.g.,
open or close) the dimer conformation for accommodating various substrates
and binding partners. Intriguingly, a crystal structure (PDB
9BA8
,
Figure
D) of truncated OGA complexed
with an active-site inhibitor displayed a “closed scissor”
conformation with each monomer retaining the classic fold as mentioned
above.
While it remains to be determined
whether this atypical dimer conformation arises from crystal packing,
is induced by inhibitor binding, or reflects a ligand-stabilized state
via conformational selection within a dynamic landscape, the observation
suggests that the OGA dimer core is not rigid. This hypothesis is
in line with the full-length OGA cryo-EM structural model. It is likely
that the OGA dimer core could be open or closed at varying levels
to accommodate distinct binding partners. Nevertheless, the ligand
properties that regulate such conformational changes are unclear.
Also, it would be interesting to evaluate if OGA conformational changes
can be exploited for future development of novel allosteric modulators.
Ideally, the design of a selective compound capable of modulating
either the open or closed conformation of OGA would enable targeted
regulation of enzyme’s activity toward specific protein substrates,
thereby providing insights into associated biological functions. Compared
to OGT, the significantly higher flexibility of OGA is attributed
to the existence of multiple intrinsically disordered regions, such
as the N-terminal tail (1–59 aa), the stalk domain loop (400–552
aa), and the loop bridging the stalk domain and pHAT domain (705–715
aa) (
Figure
A). The
inherent flexibility of these regions has hindered high-resolution
structural characterization of full-length OGA by both X-ray crystallography
and cryo-EM. Recently, two studies reported low-resolution cryo-EM
structural models of OGA (i.e., full-length OGA and a multidomain
OGA without the stalk domain loop),
,
demonstrating
considerable dynamics of the pHAT domain (
Figure
C). This dynamic positioning of the pHAT
domain, largely derived from the flexible loop bridging the stalk
domain and pHAT domain, may have functional implications for OGA regulation.
Indeed, the position of the pHAT domain can regulate the exposure
of amino acids in the environment near the OGA active site, acting
as a potential allosteric regulator of OGA.
This arrangement likely provides a fine-tuned mechanism for modulating
activity, possibly by influencing substrate recognition or enzyme
dynamics. While the pHAT domain of OGA cannot bind acetyl-CoA and
therefore does not possess acetyltransferase activity,
it is likely that it retains the ability to
interact with other proteins. Notably, emerging evidence suggests
that the pHAT domain of OGA acts as a “reader” of histone
modifications.
Selective binding with
both full-length OGA and its pHAT domain was detected for methylated
and acetylated H3K36 and H4 histone tails. The pHAT domain may provide
a flexible tether to recruit OGA enzymes to chromatin regions enriched
in these modifications on histone H3 and H4, which are associated
with transcriptional activation, transposon regulation, and DNA damage
repair. These findings suggest that the dynamic nature and conformational
plasticity of OGA are not merely structural features; they can play
critical roles in modulating OGA’s substrate recognition, catalytic
activity, and regulatory functions. Flexible structural elements may
influence, for example, the access, recognition and orientation of
substrates or binding partners. Conformational flexibility is also
relevant for acquiring enhanced substrate promiscuity. Flexible regions
in OGA may act as molecular switches or regulatory scaffolds, enabling
interactions with diverse substrates or binding partners. Moreover,
it would be interesting to explore if OGA’s flexibility profile
is intimately linked to ligand properties or related mechanisms in
ligand recognition/interaction. This information will lay an important
foundation for future design of chemical or engineered tools to modulate
OGA functions.
3.3
Post-translational Modifications (PTMs) of
OGA
Both OGT and OGA can be modified by various post-translational
modifications (PTMs).
However, unlike
many PTMs on OGT with specific functions investigated in vitro or
in vivo, most PTMs on OGA (e.g., phosphorylation, O-GlcNAcylation,
acetylation, formylation, SUMOylation, and ubiquitination) were only
identified using proteomics approaches
,
and their
functional roles remain largely unexplored. Perhaps one of the most
notable PTMs on OGA is its cleavage by caspase-3 at its D413 residue
on the stalk domain loop.
Intriguingly,
the cleaved OGA remains catalytically active. Moreover, the single
O-GlcNAc modification of OGA is located at its S405 residue, which
is only a few amino acids away from the caspase-3 cleavage site. Following
these interesting observations, many questions remain to be explored,
such as whether there is any crosstalk between the O-GlcNAcylation
and cleavage of OGA, what are the functional impacts of OGA cleavage,
and how can OGA prevent the hydrolysis of its own O-GlcNAcylation?
Addressing these questions is expected to yield new insights into
the multifaceted mechanisms underlying OGA’s functional regulation.
Very recently, SUMOylation at the K358 residue, located on the conserved
internal flexible loop region of OGA, has been reported to mediate
its binding with chaperone HSC70, promoting the degradation of OGA
through chaperone-mediated autophagy.
This new evidence supports the quantity control of OGA protein inside
cells, but whether this PTM affects OGA’s activity and/or its
substrate selectivity remains unknown. In addition to studying the
roles of existing PTMs, there is a need to detect potentially novel
PTMs on endogenous OGA proteins in tissue samples and various conditions.
As a chemical strategy to help address this need, a class of OGA inhibitors
(called bicyclic thiazolidines) was developed to facilitate the enrichment
and identification of new PTM types and sites (e.g., O-GlcNAcylation,
acetylation, and formylation) on endogenous OGA.
The crystal structures of OGA in complex with these inhibitors
have revealed that the bound compounds extend outside of the enzyme’s
catalytic pocket, allowing functionalization to develop high affinity
chemoproteomic probes for the purification of endogenous OGA from
brain tissue. These new probes enable tissue-specific detection of
PTMs on endogenous OGA, emphasizing the importance of chemical tools
for the study of OGA PTMs and their roles in vivo.
3.4
Chemical Biology Tools for OGA
Significant
efforts in the past few years have led to the development of a number
of small-molecule inhibitors and engineered OGA constructs as powerful
tools to modulate OGA activity in vitro and in cells.
,
−
These studies provided critical insights into the
functional roles of OGA and dynamic O-GlcNAcylation. Currently, most
OGA inhibitors are designed to competitively block the enzyme active
site, which can effectively maintain elevated O-GlcNAc levels on a
global scale. To achieve protein-specific O-GlcNAc hydrolysis, a split
OGA construct was fused to a nanobody that can recognize a particular
protein substrate
(
Figure
E). This engineered OGA, along with engineered
OGT, enables reversible and protein-selective editing of O-GlcNAc
levels in living cells. In another design, a truncated form of OGA,
lacking the pHAT domain and fused to an evolved intein, which is responsive
to the small molecule 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT), can induce O-GlcNAc
hydrolysis in cells with potential spatial and temporal precision
(
Figure
E). In the absence of 4-HT, the OGA–intein fusion is
inactive. Upon 4-HT treatment, the intein undergoes self-splicing,
releasing a spliced, active form of OGA to induce O-GlcNAc hydrolysis.
Dose- and time-dependent activation of OGA can be achieved by varying
the amount and treatment duration of 4-HT. By further fusing subcellular
targeting signals, this engineered OGA can restrict its deglycosylation
activity to specific cellular compartments, thereby allowing spatial
control of O-GlcNAc removal. With the recent advancement in OGA structural
and biochemical studies, targeting OGA’s noncatalytic domains
(e.g., stalk domain and pHAT domain) or their interactions can potentially
offer novel approaches to modulate OGA function toward specific endogenous
proteins while preserving its basal catalytic activity to maintain
global O-GlcNAc homeostasis.
4
Summary and Perspectives
OGT and OGA
are a single pair of human enzymes controlling O-GlcNAc
dynamics on thousands of proteins involved in numerous biological
processes.
Dysregulation of these enzymes
can lead to various pathological conditions, including cancer, diabetes,
and neurodegenerative disorders.
−
,
One of the most intriguing questions is how these enzymes recognize
their substrates and regulate their multifaceted roles in response
to nutrients and stress. This Account highlighted recent progress
in studying these essential enzymes, especially focusing on their
structural studies with implications for functional investigation
and chemical biology development. In the past decade, remarkable progress
has been achieved on the structures of OGT and OGA proteins, as well
as a series of innovative chemical and engineered tools that can inhibit
or induce the activities of these enzymes.
−
,
,
,
−
,
However, our understanding of their mechanisms of
regulation is far from complete. This is in part because previous
studies have been mainly focused on the well folded regions, especially
the catalytic domains, of these enzymes, while noncatalytic regions
have received comparatively little attention. Emerging evidence supports
that “functional hotspots” can be found outside of the
enzyme active site, including OGT’s TPR region and intervening
domain (Int-D), and OGA’s stalk domain and pHAT domain. These
O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes possess unique structural features that may
underlie their mechanisms of substrate recognition and functional
regulation. Moreover, structural flexibility and post-translational
modifications (PTMs) further complicate the regulatory landscape of
these enzymes. Beyond protein-level regulation, OGT and OGA are also
subject to control at the RNA level. For instance, splicing silencers
can modulate OGT expression,
while detained
intron retention has been implicated in the regulation of both OGT
and OGA transcripts.
Collectively, these
findings highlight the multilayered regulatory mechanisms that enable
cells to fine-tune O-GlcNAc homeostasis in response to dynamic physiological
conditions.
Several promising directions emerging from O-GlcNAc
studies warrant
further investigation. One of them is the mechanisms by which OGT
functions in nutrient sensing.
Despite
decades of observations that OGT acts as a “nutrient sensor”
in biology and disease, little is known about the molecular mechanisms
underlying this essential function. An early study suggests that a
putative phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) binding site
on OGT facilitates its recruitment to the plasma membrane during insulin
signaling.
This finding implies that
metabolites may regulate OGT’s activity and subcellular localization,
thereby linking nutrient sensing to O-GlcNAcylation. Recent work from
our group and others has identified the intervening domain (Int-D),
a poorly understood protein fold found only in OGT and its vertebrate
homologues, as a motif-dependent regulator of OGT-protein interactions
and O-GlcNAcylation.
,
This novel binding site, along
with its potential role in nutrient sensing, represents an exciting
avenue for future research.
A better
understanding of OGT-protein interactions, particularly through regions
beyond the OGT catalytic site, would be highly impactful, and will
provide critical insights into 1) O-GlcNAcylation site selectivity,
2) allosteric regulation mechanisms, 3) the multifunctional roles
and precise functional control of OGT, and 4) its dysregulation in
disease. OGT is a master regulator with a remarkably broad range of
substrate and nonsubstrate binding partners. It has evolved distinct
structural features that enable the coordination of diverse modules,
supporting the high plasticity and complexity of regulatory networks.
Elucidating OGT’s novel binding modes is expected to not only
facilitate the construction of a functional model for this essential
enzyme, but also provide valuable insights into the regulation of
its numerous interactors. This is particularly relevant to the poorly
understood intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that interact with
OGT, which are enriched in post-translational modifications (PTMs)
and frequently dysregulated in disease. The findings discussed here
will pave the way for selectively targeting OGT-mediated protein–protein
interactions (PPIs) at novel regulatory sites. OGT TPR- and Int-D-mediated
recognition of IDRs helps explain why most O-GlcNAcylation sites are
found within these regions. However, OGT is also known to modify proteins
with well-structured domains, where target residues are not readily
accessible. How OGT recognizes and modifies these structurally constrained
sites remains an open question. One possibility is that O-GlcNAcylation
occurs cotranslationally on prefolded nascent peptides.
,
Nevertheless, the molecular principles by which OGT accommodates
such sites remain elusive and warrant further investigation.
Another interesting area for future research is the potential role
of OGA’s pHAT domain. Emerging evidence suggests that this
domain may bind to substrate or nonsubstrate proteins, facilitating
the positioning of O-GlcNAcylated regions in proximity to the OGA
active site for efficient deglycosylation.
The use of remote binding sites may strengthen OGA-substrate interactions,
improve catalytic efficiency, and enhance substrate selectivity.
,
This mechanism may represent a means of long-range coordination
in OGA’s substrate recognition and functional regulation. Furthermore,
the hypothesis that the pHAT domain acts as a “reader”
of histone modifications is interesting.
This aligns with previous studies indicating that the pHAT domain
serves as an interaction hub, regulating protein O-GlcNAcylation during
DNA damage repair and potentially contributing to histone acetylation.
,
Future investigations in this area are expected to provide significant
insights into the epigenetic functions of OGA and its broader regulatory
roles.
The intrinsic flexibility of O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes
is not merely
a structural feature, but a fundamental aspect of their substrate
recognition and regulatory roles. Understanding the dynamic nature
of these enzymes has broad implications for fundamental research on
O-GlcNAcylation and the development of targeted therapeutics. However,
probing protein flexibility using a single structural biology approach
(e.g., X-ray crystallography or cryo-EM) is very challenging, particularly
when the regions exhibit high conformational dynamics or lack defined
secondary structure. It is expected that integrating interdisciplinary
experimental techniques with computational modeling will offer new
opportunities to address these challenges. For instance, nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is uniquely suited to capture dynamic
motions at atomic resolution. While conventional NMR is generally
limited by the target size, new developments have enabled the use
of this technique for large proteins or complexes, such as nucleosome-binding
proteins and ribonucleoproteins.
−
It is expected that
NMR can potentially be applied to investigate the conformational dynamics
of OGT (or OGA) substrate complexes, especially considering that a
methyl labeling approach can selectively label methyl groups on residues
like Ala, Val, Leu, Ile, Thr, and Met, which are abundant in OGT and
OGA.
In addition, a segmental isotopic
labeling approach, when coupled with expressed protein ligation and
other chemical biology strategies, can label specific protein domains
while leaving the rest of the protein unlabeled.
,
This approach has been used effectively in kinase studies and can
potentially be adapted to investigate the flexible regions in OGA,
providing new insights into the dynamic behavior of this enzyme. In
addition to NMR, small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is another widely
used approach to gain ensemble structural information on proteins
in solution.
SAXS data retain the native
conformational heterogeneity of flexible proteins, and computational
techniques such as the Ensemble Optimization Method (EOM) allow for
detailed analysis of conformational ensembles.
,
SAXS is especially powerful for dissecting the dynamic properties
of OGA’s intrinsically disordered regions and OGT’s
TPR interactions. Moreover, Single-Molecule Förster Resonance
Energy Transfer (sm-FRET) enables real-time tracking of conformational
changes in protein complexes, offering a complementary approach to
study protein dynamics.
By measuring
energy transfer efficiency between fluorophore-labeled residues, sm-FRET
can potentially capture dynamic transitions in OGT (or OGA) during
ligand binding. This approach is particularly suitable for studying
the impacts of protein flexibility in substrate recognition and other
binding events. Integrating the data from complementary experimental
approaches with computational modeling (e.g., molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation) is expected to provide unprecedented details of the conformational
dynamics for OGT and OGA. Such integrative approaches are essential
for uncovering the molecular mechanisms of protein flexibility in
facilitating substrate recognition and functional regulation.
As the field progresses, it has become evident that other regions
of OGT/OGA beyond the catalytic domain play important functional roles.
It is likely that different classes of proteins
bind OGT or OGA using different binding modes, comprising a set of
distinct regulatory sites instead of a single binding site in the
enzyme’s catalytic pocket. Such diverse binding modes may underlie
the divergent physiological and pathological functions of O-GlcNAc
cycling enzymes, emphasizing the need for additional structures of
these enzymes in complex with their substrates or nonsubstrate binding
partners. Hence, it is important to continue studying these complex
enzymes to better understand how they recognize their targets in terms
of their promiscuity, specificity, and distinct preferences. In the
meantime, other factors such as post-translational modifications and
cellular localization can also contribute to the dynamic regulation
of these O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes. Integrating information from different
studies will facilitate the development of OGT/OGA modulators to enable
more specific functional control and potential treatment of disease.
It is expected that the studies of these unique enzymes will continue
to surprise us in the future.