1
Introduction
Fish allergies, particularly
those triggered by the protein parvalbumin,
are a significant global health concern.
Parvalbumin (PRV), particularly parvalbumin-beta (PRVB), is a calcium-binding
protein predominantly found in the muscle tissue of bony fish and
is responsible for nearly 90–95% of fish-induced allergic reactions.
−
Its unique stability with high resistance to heat, digestion, and
denaturation makes it a potent allergen, capable of triggering immune
responses even after fish is cooked.
Cross-reactivity
among fish species is a significant concern for individuals with fish
allergies, as PRVB exhibits a high degree of structural similarity
across different species.
,
−
This cross-reactivity means that over 90% of fish-allergic individuals
will likely experience allergic reactions to multiple fish species.
,
In contrast, cartilaginous fish, such as sharks and rays, primarily
express parvalbumin-alpha (PRVA), a form that is much less allergenic.
,
Hilsa (
Tenualosa ilisha
), the
national
fish of Bangladesh, is often referred to as the “king of taste”
due to its rich, buttery flavor and high nutritional value, particularly
its protein content and omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids.
It plays a central role in the culinary traditions
of Bangladesh, where it is both a dietary staple and an integral part
of national celebrations. About 90% of the world’s Hilsa production
comes from Bangladesh, making it the largest Hilsa-catching nation
in the world.
,
The majority of the Hilsa catch
(65%) comes from the marine waters of the northern Bay of Bengal,
with the remaining 33% coming from the Meghna estuary system. The
Padma and other inland riverine systems comprise only up 2% of overall
Hilsa production (2%).
Numerous investigations
revealed that Bangladesh’s main rivers, including the Padma
and Meghna, have distinct physicochemical properties
−
that influence the growth rate and dominance of plankton populations,
,
whereas estuarine phytoplankton is a significant source of food
for Hilsa.
Interestingly, people of Bangladesh and West Bengal
in India believe
that Hilsa fish from the Padma River are tastier than those from other
riverine systems. A recent study on Hilsa fish from two Indian river
systems found that the better taste of Hilsa from the Padma River
might be linked to higher levels of n3:n6 fatty acids and higher amounts
of alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, oleic acid, and palmitoleic
acid.
While Hilsa is an anadromous
species, it migrates between marine
and freshwater environments during its life cycle.
This migration exposes the Hilsa fish to various environmental
conditions, including variations in water salinity, diet, and pollution.
,
According to De et al.,
the lipid and
amino acid profiles of Hilsa fish have changed dramatically across
size groups and various habitats of Indian rivers and marine environments.
Additionally, there have been significant variations in the proximate
composition, mineral content, total protein content, and fatty acid
content of two Tenualosa sp. from three distinct east coast areas
of India.
It has also been reported that
the texture of fish muscle is strongly correlated with developmental
stages and environmental factors, such as food habits.
,
Regardless of its economic importance and popularity, Hilsa
is
notable for its possible allergy risk.
,
According
to a recent cross-sectional self-declaration survey of 970 people,
Hilsa is one of the fish species that causes the greatest number of
allergies in Bangladesh.
Changes in the
muscle proteome of Hilsa fish in response to different riverine habitats
and developmental stages are therefore not surprising, which raises
the question of whether these environmental factors may influence
the amounts of PRV, the primary protein that causes fish allergies.
,
More importantly, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report
on the characterization of Hilsa PRV proteins. Therefore, this study
aims to examine the PRV levels in young or small (also known as jatka)
and adult (large) Hilsa fish in relation to the two main riverine
systems in Bangladesh. Consequently, understanding the variations
in PRV levels between different life stages of Hilsa fish will enhance
our understanding of their ecological dynamics. This knowledge may
also inform management strategies to ensure the sustainability of
Hilsa populations in the face of environmental changes and fishing
pressures. Therefore, further research into the structural and functional
characteristics of Hilsa PRV proteins could provide important insights
into their involvement in Hilsa fish biology and potential food safety
consequences. The results of our study enhanced our understanding
of fish allergies and the sustainability of Bangladesh’s Hilsa
fishery, while also providing crucial information regarding the food
safety of Hilsa fish.
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Hilsa Fish Sample Collection
In Bangladesh,
two different sizes of live Hilsa fish were collected from two major
rivers, namely, Meghna and Padma. The Meghna (22°50′03.5″N,
90°20′06.5″E) and Padma (24°29′32.1″N,
88°18′17.6″E) rivers are located in the south and
north side of the country, respectively (
Figure
A).
1
Hilsa fish collection and morphological characteristics.
(A) Fresh
Hilsa fish were caught from two main riverine systems, namely, Meghna
(22°50′03.5″N, 90°20′06.5″E)
and Padma (24°29′32.1″N, 88°18′17.6″E).
Red circles in the map showing the sampling sites (geographic coordinates
and place). The map was adopted from the national encyclopedia of
Bangladesh (
https://en.banglapedia.org/index.php/River
). (B) Average
(
n
= 3) size and weight of jatka (young/small) and
adult (large) Hilsa fish were used for proteomic analysis. P and M
indicate Padma and Meghna, respectively. (C) Muscle tissues were collected
from the dorsal portion of each fish (marked by a red box) and were
subjected to subsequent protein extraction and analysis.
Based on a recent study, female Hilsa from multiple
populations
in Bangladesh reach maturity (M50) at 31 cm total length.
In this study, Hilsa fish having an average
weight of 90.16–109.5 g and length of 21.2–21.46 cm
are referred to as jatka (young/small), while those having an average
weight of 658.26–761 g and length of 38.36–40 cm are
classified as adult (large) (
Figure
B). It has been reported that generally jatkas are
predominant in freshwater rivers, whereas adult fishes are primarily
found in the estuary and marine water.
For each Hilsa group, three fishes were subjected to subsequent
proteomic analysis. Detailed procedures for fish sample collection
have been previously reported.
,
Briefly, live Hilsa
fish were collected from the river. As Hilsa are extremely sensitive
to stress, possess a fragile body structure, and have high oxygen
demands due to their continuous swimming behavior, they die rapidly
after removal from water. To preserve sample integrity and prevent
spoilage, freshly caught fish were immediately transferred from the
nets into insulated containers containing dry ice, and a low temperature
was maintained throughout transportation to the laboratory. Fish samples
were thawed and carefully cleaned to remove scales and surface mucus.
Muscle tissue was carefully dissected from the dorsal region (
Figure
C), immediately frozen
in liquid nitrogen, and subsequently stored at −80 °C
until protein extraction and further analysis. All the required paperwork
for animal ethics clearance and fieldwork was approved by the authority
before the start of this study (ref. No.: KUAEC-2021/09/20).
2.2
Muscle Protein Extraction and Proteomic Analysis
Muscle proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific,
Cat # 89901, USA) supplemented with protease inhibitors, as previously
described in our Hilsa proteome study.
Approximately 100 μg of total protein from each sample was
subjected to in-solution digestion using Trypsin/LysC (Promega, cat.
no. V5071, USA) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50, followed
by incubation overnight at 37 °C in a rotator shaker. Digested
peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Milford,
MA, USA), vacuum-dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior
to LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptide separation was performed using
a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA)
coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
USA), following our recently published protocol with some modifications.
Briefly, tryptic peptides (2 μg) were
loaded onto a C18 analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm
particle size) and separated using a 90 min gradient of 5–35%
acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The
mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode with a data-dependent
acquisition strategy: full MS scans (
m
/
z
350–1600) were acquired at 60,000 resolution, followed by
Top15 MS/MS scans at 15,000 resolution using HCD fragmentation with
a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. The AGC target values and
maximum injection times were set according to our previous study.
Raw data were subjected to Proteome Discoverer
(PD) version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and searched against
the Hilsa protein sequence database described previously.
Peptide-spectrum matches and proteins were filtered
at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm
within Proteome Discoverer. Label-free quantification was performed
using the Minora feature detection node, and proteins showing ≥
1.5-fold change with
p
-value <0.05 were considered
significantly altered.
2.3
Quantitation of Parvalbumins Using ELISA
Eleven different fish species, i.e., Atlantic salmon (
Salmo salar
), Atlantic cod (
Gadus
morhua
), Mahi mahi (
Coryphaena hippurus
), Tilapia (
Pelmatolapia mariae
),
Catfish (
Ictalurus punctatus
), Swai
(
Pangasius bocourti
), Bighead carp
(
Hypophthalmichthys nobilis
), Grass
carp (
Ctenopharyngodon Idella
), and
Bigmouth buffalo fish (
Ictiobus cyprinellus
), were collected from the Chinese fish market in Oklahoma City,
USA. Similarly, frozen small (<500 g,
n
= 5) and
large (>800 g,
n
= 9) Hilsa fish were collected
from
local Indian grocery stores located in Oklahoma City, USA. Frozen
muscle tissue (1 g) was collected from the dorsal portion of each
fish and stored at −80 °C until further use.
PRVB protein quantitation was conducted
using the Fish Parvalbumin ELISA Kit (
ARG80797
, Arigo, Taiwan). Recombinant
mackerel (
Scomber japonicus
) parvalbumin-beta
(Sco j 1,
P59747
) was used as a standard to generate calibration curves.
All steps followed the vendor’s protocol
with minor modifications. Briefly, 100 mg of fish was homogenized
in 1.5 mL of extraction and dilution buffer using a Bead Mill 24 (
S
= 6.00,
C
= 01,
T
=
1:00, Fisherbrand, CA, USA). The mixture was then incubated at 60
°C for 15 min, followed by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 min
to collect the supernatant. Subsequently, a 10-fold dilution of all
fish samples was performed, followed by centrifugation at 7000
g
for 5 min to obtain particle-free solutions for the ELISA
experiment. Finally, the optical density (OD) was read at 450 nm (reference
OD 620 nm) within 30 min using a microplate reader (Synergy H1, BioTek,
VT), and the protein concentration was quantified based on the standard
parvalbumin using a logistic curve fit.
2.4
Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) Analysis
of Hilsa and Other Parvalbumin Proteins
A total of seven
unique peptide sequences that correspond to the PRVs of six different
fish species, i.e., the Hilsa, Tilapia, Catfish, Swai, Bighead carp,
and Grass carp, were selected for a targeted proteomic analysis using
a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (TSQ Quantiva, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Germany) coupled with a nano UHPLC (Dionex 3000, Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Germany).
To create a complex fish mixture,
10 μg of trypsin-digested peptides from each fish species were
combined in a low protein-binding Eppendorf tube. Complex tryptic
peptides (2 μg) were chromatographically separated using reverse-phase
chromatography with acidified ACN (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid)
and water (0.1% formic acid in LC–MS grade water) as the mobile
phases. Separation of peptides was achieved with a total 60 min run
with an analytical gradient of ACN from 5 to 35% in 30 min at a flow
rate of 350 nL/min through an EasySpray (3 μm, 75 μm ×
15 cm, ES900, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) analytical column,
followed by a quick increase to 95% ACN as a wash step, then equilibrated
back to 5% ACN for the remaining 10 min.
For all of the peptides,
the y-ions were selected for MRM analysis.
The MRM method was developed using Skyline software version 24.1 (
https://skyline.ms
), an open-source
tool for mass spectrometry analysis (
Table S1
). The parameters used for the quadrupole mass spectrometer instrument
were as follows: positive-ion spray voltage, 2200 kV; ion transfer
tube temperature, 350 °C; cycle time, 0.5 s; chromatographic
peak width, 3.0 s; collision pressure, 1.5 mTorr; and Q1 and Q3 resolutions,
0.2 and 0.7 (fwhm), respectively. MS RAW files were further processed
and analyzed by Skyline software (Ver. 24.1.0.199).
2.5
Bioinformatics Analysis
PRV sequences
were downloaded from the WHO/IUIS Allergen Nomenclature Database (
https://www.allergen.org/pubs.php
). Multiple amino acid sequence alignment was performed using an
open-source sequence alignment platform Clustal Omega (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/jdispatcher/msa/clustalo
), and a heatmap on percent (%) identity was generated using Python.
Phylogenetic analysis was performed by using the neighbor-joining
(NJ) method through MEGA V. 11
and visualized
by iTOL V. 6.
Bootstrap test percentages
(≥60%) of 10,000 replicates are shown next to the branches.
PCA and Volcano plots were further generated
and visualized by SRplot,
an open-source
online bioinformatic platform. For PCA, 95% confidence ellipses were
used to cluster the data points from each group. Volcano plots were
generated using a fold-change threshold of ≥1.5 and a
p
-value <0.05. Histograms were generated using a Python
script (
https://github.com/tingying-he/KaiVis/blob/main/protein-rank-bar-chart-with-highlights.ipynb
). Bar and Violin plots were generated with GraphPad Prism 7.0. The
Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) (
http://tools.iedb.org/bcell/
) was used to predict B-cell epitopes in accordance with the Kolaskar
and Tongaonkar Antigenicity platform. The 3D structures of PRV variants
were predicted using AlphaFold2,
and
structural visualization and analysis were performed using PyMOL.
3
Results
3.1
Identification of Parvalbumin Isoforms in
Hilsa Muscle Tissue
A total of 4448 unique peptides corresponding
to 646 unique protein groups were successfully identified and quantified
from Hilsa muscle samples (Tables
S2
and
S3
). Among these, three proteins were identified
as parvalbumins (PRVs) with high sequence coverage ranging between
72 and 74%. Among these three PRVs, the accession T_ilisha_TRINITY_DN10771_c0_g2_i1.p1
was annotated in the database as parvalbumin-beta (PRVB), whereas
T_ilisha_TRINITY_DN37439_c0_g1_i3.p1 and T_ilisha_TRINITY_DN10771_c0_g1_i1.p3
were both annotated as parvalbumin-alpha (PRVA).
Each Hilsa
PRV was uniquely identified by at least four distinct peptides, providing
high confidence for the identification of multiple PRV isoform amino
acid sequences in Hilsa muscle tissue (
Figure
A and
Table S4
). The three Hilsa PRVs have extremely different N-terminal sequences,
and we were able to identify these distinct peptides using our discovery
proteomic approach (
Figure
B).
2
LC–MS/MS proteomic characteristics of Hilsa parvalbumin
isoforms. (A) Multiple amino acid sequence alignment of three PRV
isoforms of Hilsa fish. Peptide sequences labeled as yellow (PRVA,
parvalbumin-alpha), cyan (PRVA1, parvalbumin-alpha1), and green (PRVB,
parvalbumin-beta) were identified by LC–MS/MS analysis. (B)
LC–MS/MS fragmentation three distinct peptides correspond to
N-terminal of PRVA (yellow), PRVA1 (cyan), and PRVB (green) isoforms.
To better understand the phylogenetic relationship
of these three
Hilsa PRVs, we further conducted a phylogenetic analysis of over 170
parvalbumin sequences from 10 distinct PRV gene families (
pvalb1–10
) in bony fish and α-parvalbumins
from other vertebrates, including human, mouse, shark, frog, chicken,
and crocodile, to better understand the diversity and evolutionary
distinctions of Hilsa PRV isoforms.
Our
findings revealed that Hilsa PRVB is closely related to the
pvalb1
and
pvalb2
gene clusters, while
PRVA and PRVA1 exhibited closer evolutionary relationships with the
pvalb4
and
pvalb3
groups, respectively
(
Figure
). Therefore,
based on the phylogenetic relationships, we have renamed PRVB as “Hilsa
PVRB1,” PRVA as “Hilsa PRVB4,” and PRVA1 as “Hilsa
PRVB3,” corresponding to their close homology with
Clupea harengus
pvalb
4 and
pvalb
3, respectively. As emphasized by Dijkstra et al.,
,
parvalbumin proteins should be named according to their phylogenetic
relationships. Thus, the revised nomenclature of the Hilsa PRVAs is
well-supported, and all identified Hilsa PRVs can appropriately be
considered to be PRVB isoforms.
3
Phylogenetic analysis shows the relationship
of Hilsa parvalbumins
with the entire fish and other species parvalbumins. The phylogenetic
tree was constructed using 170 PRVs in total, including three Hilsa
PRVs denoted by red text, by the open-source platform NGPhylogeny.fr
(
https://ngphylogeny.fr
). The PRV sequences are curated from the previously published report
that contained all bony fish PRVs and α-parvalbumins from other
vertebrates.
As expected, Hilsa PRV isoforms exhibit a lower
sequence identity
(<61%) with the known PRVAs (
Figure
A), while the known PRVAs from frogs, chickens, crocodiles,
and other vertebrates cluster together (
Figure
). This finding implies that Hilsa muscle
PRVs are distinct from the other vertebrate PRVAs and have evolved
a close relationship to the fish
pvalb1–4
family.
Furthermore, an in silico analysis of Hilsa PRVs’ B-cell epitope
map and scores revealed that they were very similar to the well-characterized
PRVBs of a common carp PRBV allergen (cypc1.02) (
Figure S1
).
4
Evolutionary relationship between Hilsa parvalbumins and
all WHO/IUIS-registered
parvalbumins. (A) Heat map showing the amino acid sequence identities
(%) of all WHO/IUIS-registered parvalbumins and Hilsa PRVs. The sequence
identities were calculated using Multiple Sequence Alignment in Clustal
Omega (EMBL-EBI). (B) Comparative table shows the theoretical pI/Mw
and the signature amino acid position of Hilsa PRVs compared to three
well-characterized PRVB and PRVA. (C) Structural comparison of PRVB
(Cypc1.02, Common carp) with the three Hilsa PRVs (PRVB1, PRVB3, and
PRVB4). The 3D structures of Hilsa PRVs were predicted using AlphaFold2
and visualized in PyMOL. Red regions represent predicted B-cell epitope
binding sites.
A multiple sequence alignment with WHO/IUIS-registered
parvalbumin
protein sequences revealed that all three Hilsa PRVs have 74–83%
sequence identity (
Figure
A), despite the fact that Hilsa PRVB has a high percentage
of sequence similarity (80–89%) with freshwater carps, catfish,
and herring PRVBs (
Figure
A). However, Hilsa PRVA isoforms have a higher sequence identity
(>70%) with other fish species belonging to the Clupeiformes, including
Pacific pilchard (Sarsa1.0101) and Atlantic herring (Cluh1.0101, Cluh1.0201,
and Cluh1.0301). A side-by-side amino acid sequence analysis of Hilsa
PRVs with three well-characterized PRVA and PRVB revealed no significant
differences in the theoretical pI and Mw of all three Hilsa PRV isoforms
from those of other PRVs. However, the amino acid positions of the
known allergen PRVB attributes are highly conserved for all three
Hilsa PRVs (
Figure
B). To further investigate structural conservation and allergenic
potential, the 3D structures of all three Hilsa PRVs were predicted
using AlphaFold2 and compared with the well-characterized PRVB from
common carp (Cypc1.02) (
Figure
C). All Hilsa PRVs exhibited highly similar 3D folds to the
reference structure, particularly in the EF-hand domains typical of
calcium-binding parvalbumins.
The predicted
IgE-binding epitope sites, visualized in red, were found at nearly
identical spatial positions across all structures, with comparable
confidence scores. This structural overlap suggests that Hilsa PRVs
may share similar immunogenic profiles with known allergenic parvalbumins.
3.2
Relative Abundance of Hilsa PRV Isoforms in
Muscle Tissue
We further performed a relative abundance–based
quantitative analysis to assess the abundance patterns of the three
PRV isoforms in comparison with other proteins identified in Hilsa
muscle tissue across different developmental stages and geographic
locations. The results showed that PRVB3 and PRVB4 are consistently
among the most abundant proteins in Hilsa muscle tissue, surpassing
PRVB1 irrespective of developmental stage or geographic distribution
(
Figure
). However,
they exhibited relatively higher abundance in the jatka groups comparative
to adult Hilsa.
5
Relative quantitation of PRV isoforms in Hilsa muscle
tissue. The
histogram shows the relative abundance of Hilsa PRVB1, PRVB3, and
PRVB4 in different Hilsa samples collected from two different riverine
systems.
3.3
Comparative Proteome Analysis of Adult and
Jatka Hilsa Collected from the Padma and Meghna Rivers
The
label-free comparative proteome analysis of total Hilsa muscle protein
abundance shows tight clustering within the two adults (APa and AMe)
and two jatka groups (JPa and JMe). However, there is a significant
difference between the two sizes (adult and jatka;
Figure
A). Similarly, a heat map analysis
of the total number of unique proteins further demonstrates the differential
abundance between the size groups (
Figure
B). Regardless of the two distinct riverine
systems, volcano plot analysis also showed that only PRVB1, out of
the three PRVs found in this study, demonstrated significant alteration
(at least 1.5-fold with a
p
-value < 0.05) between
the adult and jatka fish (
Figure
C, D). The bar diagrams show the overall abundance
of the three PRVs compared with the Hilsa samples (
Figure
E–G).
6
Comparative proteome
profiles of adult and jatka Hilsa fish from
the Meghna and Padma rivers. (A) Principal component analysis (PCA)
of normalized total protein abundance (peak area) of adult (A) and
jatka (J) Hilsa fish muscle samples collected from the Meghna (Me)
and Padma (Pa) rivers. The PCA plot clearly separates the adult (AMe
and APa) and jatka groups (JMe and JPa). (B) Heatmap illustrates the
differential expression of grouped abundance 646 proteins identified
and quantified across the four groups: AMe, APa, JMe, and JPa. The
color gradient reflects the relative increase (red) or decrease (green)
in protein abundance, highlighting significant distinctions between
the adult and jatka groups. (C, D) Volcano plots showing the differential
protein expression between JPa vs APa (C) and JMe vs AMe (D) groups
with significantly (at least 1.5-fold and adjusted
p
-value > 0.05) upregulated (red) and downregulated (green) proteins.
Gray dots represent proteins that are not statistically significant
between the groups. (E–G) Bar diagrams represent PRVB3 (E),
PRVB4 (F), and PRVB1 (G) protein abundance in four Hilsa samples quantified
by label-free proteomic analysis. Asterisk over the bars in PRVB indicating
statistical significance between the size (adult and jatka) of Hilsa
fish samples (G). (H) Violin plot shows the relative PRVB contents
measured by ELISA in adult (
n
= 9) and young (
n
= 5) Hilsa muscle tissues.
Although there was no discernible difference in
PRVs between the
two riverine systems, our proteomic study demonstrated significant
differences in PRVB abundance between the adult and jatka Hilsa groups.
Therefore, we further intend to cross-validate the proteomic results
by measuring the PRVB content in Hilsa fish samples using an independent
sandwich ELISA assay, utilizing an unbiased Hilsa sample pool collected
from the local fish market. Relative quantitative analysis revealed
that smaller Hilsa fish (<500 g) contained about 1.32 mg/g of PRVB,
while larger Hilsa fish (>800 g) contained 0.62 mg/g (
Figure
H).
3.4
Relative Quantitation of Parvalbumin-Beta
in Hilsa and Other Fish Species
To better understand the
relative PRVB content of Hilsa fish compared to those of other commonly
consumed freshwater and saltwater fish species, we measured the PRVB
of 10 fish species using the ELISA assay. As anticipated, fish-to-fish
variation in PRVB content was substantial (
Figure
).
7
Relative parvalbumin-beta (PRVB) contents in
the dorsal muscle
tissues from 10 species of fish. Three biological samples from each
of the other fish species and 14 Hilsa fish ranging between 500 and
1000 g were used for ELISA analysis. Each bar represents the average
(±SD) and the actual value indicated above the bars.
Compared to saltwater fish species, freshwater
fish had much greater
levels of PRVB. While the PRVB contents of three marine fish species
(Atlantic salmon, Atlantic cod, and Mahi mahi) were extremely low
(0.08–2.11 mg/g), PRVB contents were much higher (4.65–21.64
mg/g) in seven freshwater fish species (Catfish, Swai, Bighead carp,
Grass carp, and Buffalo fish). Interestingly, PRVB content was extremely
low in the estuarine fish Hilsa and the most cultured fish Tilapia,
at 0.54 and 0.42 mg/g, respectively (
Figure
). Overall, except for Tilapia, the PRVB
concentration of Hilsa fish was 40 times lower than that of other
highly consumed Asian freshwater fish species.
3.5
Hilsa Parvalbumin for Targeted Analysis of
Food Safety and Authenticity
A targeted proteomics experiment
utilizing multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was conducted to identify
the unique peptides that correlate to PRVs in six frequently ingested
freshwater fish species: the Swai, Grass carp, Hilsa, Catfish, Tilapia,
and Bighead carp. The Hilsa peptides IGVDEFAALVK and IGVDEFVAMVK,
which correspond to PRVB1 and PRVB3, respectively, were successfully
identified by our discovery proteomics approach (
Table S4
).
Unique PRV peptide sequences for all other
fish species were identified by using Skyline software. Except for
the Hilsa PRVB1 peptide KIGVDEFAALVK (Yellow,
Figure
A), shared with Tilapia, the PRV peptide
sequences unique to each fish species are highlighted in green (
Figure
A). A trypsin-digested
peptide mixture of six fish species was analyzed by LC–MS/MS
using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. The results reveal distinct
chromatographic separation with unique retention times of each PRV
peptide, confirming the specificity of the fish species (
Figure
B). Furthermore,
the coelution of multiple transition ions under the same retention
time for each PRV peptide confirms these peptides’ optimal
selection and reliability for the future development of MRM-based
techniques to identify and quantify PRV isoforms from any complex
fish matrix (
Figure
C).
8
Selection and identification of ideal unique parvalbumin peptides
of six different fish species using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)
for targeted proteomics analysis. (A) Multiple amino acid sequence
analysis of Tilapia, Bighead carp, Catfish, Swai, Grass carp, and
Hilsa shows the unique (green) and shared peptides in the C-terminal
of PRVs. (B) Chromatogram representing the seven peptides corresponding
to PRVs of six different fish species. (C) Transition peaks on Skyline
for precursor peptides LFLQNFSASA, IGVDEFAAMV, IGVDEFASLVKA, IGIDEFEAALV,
IGVDEFVAMV, IGIDEFEAIVHQ, and IGIDEFEALVHE. Each color represents
a different transition ion (i.e., precursor peptide/fragment ion pair).
4
Discussion
Fish is one of the “big
nine” sources of food allergies.
Since PRVs are the primary muscle proteins that cause allergic responses,
risking food safety and human health worldwide. Therefore, identifying,
characterizing, and quantifying the PRV proteins in any species of
fish is the first step in studying food safety and fish allergies.
Like many other fish species, Hilsa has also
been shown to have IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions.
,
More importantly, a recent survey on food allergy sensitivities
found that Hilsa is one of the top three foods that cause allergic
responses in Bangladeshi population, and that over 30% of Northern
Indians patients in the age group 5–40 years experienced allergic
reaction to Hilsa fish.
These earlier
investigations clearly showed that Hilsa is allergic,
similar to many other bony fish species, with PRVB being the primary
source triggering allergic reactions.
,
−
However, there are currently no comprehensive reports on Hilsa parvalbumins,
the primary known cause of fish allergies. Thus, a deeper comprehension
of the protein sequences and isoforms and comparative quantitative
analysis of Hilsa parvalbumins in muscle tissue may result in better
diagnostic tools and possible therapeutic interventions. Furthermore,
this knowledge may help develop guidelines for safe consumption and
management of Hilsa-related allergies among affected populations.
The LC–MS/MS-based proteomic approach is one of the advanced
analytical platforms commonly used for identification and characterization
of fish allergens like parvalbumins. Thus, so far, only two proteomics
studies on Hilsa fish that have been published focus on how muscle
tissue
and serum
respond to different developmental stages. Additionally, a metabolomic
profile of Hilsa fish revealed that the nutritional composition of
the fish is significantly altered by fecundity, geographic distribution,
and growth and developmental phases.
,
However, to
the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated how allergen
proteins respond to the geographical location and developmental stage
of Hilsa fish. In this work, we use LC–MS/MS techniques to
characterize PRVs, the primary allergen of Hilsa fish, in relation
to their geographic distribution and developmental stage.
For
the first time, in this report, we revealed the actual peptide
sequences of three PRV isoforms found in Hilsa muscle tissue using
a discovery proteomic approach. Phylogenetic analysis of Hilsa PRVs
with the entire bony fish PRVBs and nonfish PRVAs further revealed
that all three Hilsa PRVs are members of the teleost
pvalb1–4
gene family (
Figure
). Remarkably, the
pvalb1–4
gene family,
which is collectively referred to as allergens, was significantly
expressed in muscle and had high sequence similarity (>85%) to
each
other.
,
Furthermore, comparative amino acid sequence
analysis of Hilsa PRVs with WHO/IUIS-recognized PRV allergen sequences
revealed that Hilsa PRVB shares close similarity with PRVBs from freshwater
fish species, including Common carp, Grass carp, and Catfish. Interestingly,
among the three Hilsa PRVs, the sequence identity was between 72 and
74% (
Figure
A). Bony
fish have been found to contain multiple copies of parvalbumin genes
(
pvalb
) (1–10), which vary significantly between
species.
For instance, rainbow trout
and barramundi have lower intraspecies amino acid sequence identity
(<68%) of PRVs, indicating the diversity of allergenic parvalbumins.
On the other hand, Hilsa PRVs showed lower
sequence identity (<61%)
with well-characterized PRVAs of chicken, frog, and crocodile (
Figure
). Nonetheless, the
amino acid locations of the PRVB characteristics are highly conserved,
and the three Hilsa PRVs have an identical number of amino acids (
Figure
B). In addition to
sequence-level analysis, structural modeling of Hilsa PRVs provided
deeper insights into their potential allergenicity. The predicted
3D structures of the three Hilsa isoforms were highly conserved and
closely resembled the well-characterized PRVB structure from common
carp (Cypc1.02) (
Figure
C), with preserved EF-hand motifs and consistent folding patterns.
Notably, surface-mapped IgE-binding epitopes
were spatially conserved across all structures, suggesting that structural
features contributing to allergenicity are maintained despite isoform
differences. These findings underscore the importance of combining
sequence-, structural-, and epitope-level analyses to comprehensively
assess the allergenic potential of fish parvalbumins.
Furthermore,
a comparison of Hilsa PRVs’ B-cell epitope
mapping and epitope scores revealed that they were very comparable
to the well-characterized PRVB of common carp (cypc1.02) (
Figure S1
).These findings provide robust support
for the distinct identity and evolutionary separation of the three
Hilsa PRV isoforms and align with recent reports highlighting the
complexity, microheterogeneity, and lineage diversification within
the parvalbumin gene family in teleost fish.
However, further studies are necessary to elucidate the specific
biological implications of these Hilsa PRVs in the context of allergenicity.
Measurement of the PRVB level is the first step in identifying
the allergy sensitivity of a fish species.
Despite differences between the two riverine habitats, label-free
quantitative proteomic analysis reveals that relative PRVB abundance
was significantly lower in adult Hilsa compared to jatka fish, while
PRVA levels remained constant (
Figure
C–G). We acknowledge that the sample size (
n
= 3) per group may limit a study that draws population-level
implications; however, it is important to keep in mind that jatka
fishing is illegal in Bangladesh. Thus, collecting a higher number
of jatka samples is a further major challenge. However, our investigation
demonstrated that jatka (a total of six fish from two distinct places)
exhibited a pattern of PRVB abundance similar to that of the adult,
supporting the steady trend of PRVB levels in smaller Hilsa fish.
We further cross-validate this finding using an alternative targeted
protein quantitation method mostly known as ELISA using unbiased Hilsa
fish samples (large and small) that were collected from the local
market (
Figure
H).
Although the specific riverine environment is unknown, the package
label states that these Hilsa fish samples are from Bangladesh. We
acknowledge that the development of a species-specific ELISA for Hilsa
would enable more accurate and direct quantification of PRVB isoforms.
Nevertheless, the principal objective of the present study was not
to design or optimize an ELISA assay but rather to employ it as a
complementary analytical tool to corroborate MS-based findings. According
to the vendor’s documentation, the commercial ELISA kit used
in this study is designed to detect parvalbumin (PRVB) across multiple
fish species, including herring (
Clupea harengus
) and mackerel. Phylogenetic analysis further revealed that Hilsa
PRVB1 shares a close evolutionary relationship with
C. harengus
pvalb1
(
Figure
). The use of a mackerel-derived
standard for cross-species parvalbumin detection is well-supported
in the literature. For instance, Shibahara et al.
developed a sandwich ELISA using antibodies raised against
Pacific mackerel parvalbumin, reporting 22.6–99% cross-reactivity
with parvalbumins from other fish species such as eel, horse mackerel,
sea bream, and tuna. Similarly, Dong and Raghavan
utilized the same commercial kit calibrated with recombinant
mackerel PRVB to quantify parvalbumin in Atlantic cod, demonstrating
the cross-species validity of this approach. Therefore, the ELISA
results obtained in this study are both consistent and biologically
meaningful, reinforcing the robustness and reliability of MS-based
findings.
Regardless of sample origin and quantification methods
used to
determine the PRVB level, these findings collectively imply that Hilsa
PRVB is regulated by developmental stages, and that Bangladesh’s
riverine environment has little effect on PRVB. This developmental
regulation of PRVB may be associated with increased muscle activity
or calcium-binding demand during early growth stages. Studies on migratory
and fast-swimming fish have shown that juvenile fish exhibit greater
expression of parvalbumin in white (fast-twitch) muscle fibers, which
are linked to rapid swimming and escape responses.
,
Despite being in a more metabolically active life stage, younger
or jatka Hilsa fish may have greater PRVB levels as a physiological
response to their swimming technique and the makeup of their muscle
fibers. These findings are consistent with previous studies of the
protein and lipid profiles of Hilsa fish.
,
,
Due to their more significant movement activity
and less dark muscle in the dorsal muscle region, smaller Hilsa fish
may have higher levels of PRVB than larger fish.
,
,
Future research on tissue-specific expression
could further elucidate the mechanisms behind these variations and
their implications for fish allergy management.
A common phenomenon
strongly linked to allergic reactions to fish
is the variation of PRVB levels in various fish species.
,
,
,
−
However, the profiling of allergens in the great
majority (>32 K) of fish species has never been reported.
This gap in research highlights the need for
comprehensive studies that can identify and characterize these allergens.
By increasing our understanding of the allergenic profiles of various
fish species, we can better inform public health policies and guide
individuals with fish allergies in making safer dietary choices. In
this regard, we also compare the levels of PRVB in Hilsa fish with
those in other commonly consumed freshwater and multiple known marine
fish species (
Figure
). Commercial ELISA kits are known to have limitations in species-specific
detection and typically provide relative, rather than absolute, quantification.
Cross-reactivity issues have also been documented.
Our results align with those reported by Wai et al.,
who employed SDS-PAGE and PARV-19 binding assays.
Specifically, the relative distribution of PRVB between cod and salmon
in our study mirrors the patterns observed by Sharp et al. using antisalmon
and antipilchard antibodies. These findings indicate that despite
interspecies variability in antibody-binding efficiency, generic PRVB
ELISAs remain valuable for relative allergen detection and quantification.
Accordingly, while this ELISA approach is appropriate for comparative
analyses, its limitations in achieving absolute quantification should
be acknowledged.
Regardless, our findings showed that relative
PRVB level in Hilsa
fish is more than 40 times lower than that of fish species in the
carp family (Common carp, Buffalo fish, and Grass carp) and more than
20 times lower than catfish-like fishes (Catfish, Swai). However,
the muscle tissue Hilsa PRVB levels (mg/g) are comparable to those
of well-known marine fish species, such as Cod, Salmon, and Mahi Mahi.
Our findings are consistent with earlier studies showing that freshwater
fishes had higher levels of PRVB than marine or migratory fish species.
Although Hilsa exhibited relatively lower PRVB
levels compared with other freshwater species, this does not necessarily
translate into reduced clinical allergenicity. Previous surveys in
Bangladesh and India consistently report Hilsa as one of the most
common allergenic fish. This apparent contradiction may be explained
by multiple factors: (i) very high regional consumption of Hilsa,
which increases exposure risk, (ii) lack of comparative data with
other fish species, (iii) extensive cross-reactivity of PRVB epitopes
across fish species, and (iv) preparation methods (e.g., cooking,
processing) that may influence protein stability and allergen presentation.
It has been reported that patients with parvalbumin-specific IgE alone
often tolerate low-PRVB fish, such as swordfish or tuna.
,
Therefore, discovering various low-parvalbumin fish species could
offer new dietary choices for individuals with moderate to high threshold
dose reactivity.
Therefore, our comparative
quantitative results should be interpreted as indicators of intrinsic
allergen burden, while the real-world allergy risk is shaped by broader
immunological and cultural contexts. Nonetheless, our proteomics data
independently confirmed the presence of PRVB isoforms in Hilsa, supporting
the validity of the comparative results. We emphasize that these ELISA-based
comparisons should be interpreted as semiquantitative indicators of
relative allergen presence across species rather than absolute measurements.
Development of a Hilsa-specific PRVB assay in the future would further
strengthen these findings.
Given its allergenic features, presence
of fish in foods is almost
globally subject to mandatory labeling.
Notwithstanding, differences in allergen burden have a crucial impact
on the allergenicity and tolerability of distinct fish species. Patients
with singly PRVB-specific IgE alone often tolerate low-PRVB fish,
such as swordfish or tuna.
,
Therefore, evolving
labeling from the simple declaration of the presence of fish to a
process including the fish species will significantly improve food
safety and authenticity. With this aim, unique PRV peptides have been
effectively exploited as selective and specific markers of fish allergens.
−
In addition to identifying major fish allergens and verifying fish
products, a single peptide marker can be used to develop alternative
LC–MS-based assays, such as AQUA (Absolute Quantification)
MRM technology, to measure allergen levels in a complex combination.
−
Here, using a targeted proteomic approach, two distinct peptides
that correspond to Hilsa PRVs were further validated as potential
Hilsa markers from a freshwater fish mixture comprising Grass carp,
Bighead carp, Swai, Catfish, Tilapia, and Hilsa meat (
Figure
). Thus, the identification
of isoform- and species-specific PRV peptides in Hilsa using targeted
proteome analysis not only advances our understanding of the unique
PRV peptide patterns associated with each fish species but also offers
practical value for fish allergen detection. Furthermore, these peptides
can be used to develop targeted LC–MS/MS or immunoassay-based
tools for authentication and differentiation of seafood products for
a variety of commercial and culinary applications.
−
These findings further highlight
the potential of LC–MS/MS as a trustworthy instrument for assessing
the quality and authenticity of fish in the seafood sector.
In summary, for the first time, we define the PRVs of the Hilsa
fish, the most economically important fish species in South Asian
countries, particularly Bangladesh. We defined the amino acid sequences
of three distinct PRVs in Hilsa muscle tissue. Comparative evolutionary
study with all known PRV sequences revealed that all three Hilsa PRVs
are closely related to the well-preserved allergic
pvabl1–4
gene family. Quantitative investigation shows that smaller fish
have PRVB levels higher than those of larger fish, and Hilsa PRVB
levels are 20–40 times lower than those of other popular freshwater
fish species. The discovery of distinct PRV peptides validates the
versatility of the LC–MS/MS proteomics technique in characterizing
allergen proteins in fish species. Unique Hilsa PRV peptides not only
provide a dependable platform for detecting and quantifying the Hilsa
samples in processed fish products but also offer great potential
for assessing food safety and lowering the risks of allergen contamination
in packaged fish consumed globally. Since Hilsa has a lower PRVB than
other popular freshwater fish species, incorporating Hilsa fish in
diets may offer a sustainable way for individuals with PRVB-sensitive
allergies to reduce allergy-related risks. Furthermore, the management
of Hilsa fisheries will significantly benefit from the comparative
quantification of PRVB levels in Hilsa fish to select the right size
of fish.
Supplementary Material