Specifications Table
Subject
Medical Sciences & Pharmacology, Plant Science
Specific subject area
Isolation of nanovesicles derived from dried and fresh Salvia miltiorrhiza, as well as miRNA sequencing, untargeted metabolomics sequencing, untargeted lipidomics sequencing, proteomics sequencing, and data analysis
Type of data
Table, Figure
Data collection
SDNV-D was isolated from the decoction of dried Salvia miltiorrhiza roots using ultra-high-speed differential centrifugation. In contrast, SDNV-F was isolated from the juice of fresh Salvia miltiorrhiza roots by combining ultra-high-speed differential centrifugation with sucrose density gradient centrifugation.
miRNA Sequencing: Total RNA was extracted from two types of nanovesicles using an RNA extraction kit. The RNA purity was checked with Nanodrop, its concentration accurately measured with Qubit, and its integrity precisely assessed with an Agilent 2100. After passing the quality inspection, a Small RNA Sample Preparation Kit was used to construct the library. Following library construction, initial quantification was performed with Qubit 2.0, and the library was diluted to 1 ng/µl. Then, an Agilent 2100 was used to measure the insert size of the library. Once the insert size met the expected standard, q-PCR was employed to accurately determine the effective concentration of the library and ensure its quality. After passing the quality check, different libraries were pooled according to the effective concentration and target off-machine data volume requirements, then sequenced on the Illumina SE50 platform.
Untargeted Metabolomics and Lipidomics Sequencing: Metabolites were extracted using organic solvents. The target compounds underwent chromatographic separation using a Vanquish Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) system with a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH Amide column (2.1 mm × 50 mm, 1.7 µm). An Orbitrap Exploris 120 mass spectrometer was used to collect primary and secondary mass spectrometry data under the control of the software (Xcalibur, Version 4.4, Thermo). The raw data were converted to mzXML format using ProteoWizard software and processed (including peak identification, peak extraction, peak alignment, and integration) with a custom-developed R package. Substance annotation was performed by matching with a self-built secondary mass spectrometry database, with an algorithm scoring cutoff value set at 0.3.
Proteomics Sequencing: Proteins in the nanovesicles were extracted with a protein extraction kit and then digested with a protease.
The lyophilized peptide samples were separated using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system, ionized via a nanoESI source, and then detected in Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode using an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer. The DIA mass spectrometry data were subjected to protein search, identification, and quantitative analysis using DIA-NN software (
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0638-x
, Version 1.8).
Data source location
Hebei Provincial Engineering Laboratory of Plant Bioreactor Preparation Technology
Hebei University of Chinese Medicine, No. 326 Xinshi South Road, Qiaoxi District, Shijiazhuang 050090 Hebei, China.
Data accessibility
Repository name: National Center for Biotechnology Information
Data identification number: PRJNA1238489
Direct URL to data:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra?term=PRJNA1238489&cmd=DetailsSearch
Repository name: National Genomics Data Center
Data identification number: PRJCA037553
Direct URL to data:
https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/omix/release/OMIX009527
Repository name: National Genomics Data Center
Data identification number: PRJCA037562
Direct URL to data:
https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/omix/release/OMIX009530
Repository name: National Genomics Data Center
Data identification number: PRJCA037563
Direct URL to data:
https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/omix/release/OMIX009533
Related research article
None
1
Value of the Data
•
Cardiovascular diseases remain a primary global health concern. Salvia miltiorrhiza, a traditional Chinese herbal medicine, has long been used to prevent and treat these conditions because it promotes blood flow and resolves stasis [
1
,
2
]. However, its traditional dosage forms have inherent limitations, such as low bioavailability of active ingredients, rapid breakdown in the digestive system, and inability to target lesions, significantly limiting its therapeutic potential.
•
The method combining ultra-high-speed differential centrifugation and sucrose density gradient centrifugation has been experimentally verified to effectively enrich Salvia miltiorrhiza-derived nanovesicles, ensuring the stable isolation of nanovesicles from traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).
•
We conducted miRNA sequencing, untargeted metabolomics, lipidomics, and proteomics analyses on SDNV-D and SDNV-F to thoroughly examine their compositional differences and possible pharmacological mechanisms in various diseases.
•
As a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) that promotes blood circulation and removes blood stasis, Salvia miltiorrhiza-derived nanovesicles are promising new carriers for delivering TCM active ingredients and treating chronic inflammatory diseases. These data can serve as a model for characterizing components and screening activities of TCM-derived nanovesicles, while also offering essential references for exploring TCM intervention targets in endocrine or metabolism-related diseases.
•
These data can be reanalyzed and combined with other omics data to further clarify the molecular regulatory networks of SDNVs in various diseases, and to establish a data foundation for multi-omics research and the exploration of pharmacological mechanisms of nanovesicles derived from other traditional Chinese medicines.
2
Background
Salvia miltiorrhiza is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine that effectively stimulates blood flow and relieves stagnation. It has been used for thousands of years to prevent and treat cardiovascular diseases. The active compounds extracted from its roots have been shown to regulate lipid metabolism, reduce vascular inflammation, and protect endothelial function [
[3]
,
[4]
,
[5]
]. However, traditional forms of Salvia miltiorrhiza have limitations, such as low bioavailability of active ingredients, easy degradation in the digestive tract, and inability to deliver targeted treatment to lesions; these challenges restrict its full therapeutic potential.
Recently, plant-derived nanovesicles (PNVs) have become a new natural drug delivery system and therapeutic agent, gaining widespread interest in treating chronic inflammatory diseases [
6
]. Compared to synthetic nanocarriers, PNVs have advantages such as good biocompatibility, the ability to cross biological barriers, and the capacity to carry a variety of endogenous active molecules. Studies have confirmed that nanovesicles from plants like grapes and ginseng can provide anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and tissue-repairing effects in chronic conditions [
7
,
8
]. However, research on nanovesicles derived from Salvia miltiorrhiza roots is still in the early stages.
In this study, two types of SDNVs were isolated and purified for the first time using a combination of ultrahigh-speed differential centrifugation and sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Additionally, multi-omics technologies were employed to clarify differences in miRNA, metabolite, and protein profiles between these two SDNV types, laying a foundation for further exploring their disease intervention targets and assessing their therapeutic potential.
3
Data Description
This experiment involved dried and fresh rhizomes of Salvia miltiorrhiza. Ultra-high-speed differential centrifugation and combined sucrose gradient density centrifugation were used to isolate nanovesicles from the decoction of dried Salvia miltiorrhiza rhizomes and the juice of fresh ones. Subsequently, miRNA sequencing, non-targeted metabolomics sequencing, non-targeted lipidomics sequencing, and proteomics sequencing were performed on the two types of nanovesicles. These sequencing data were categorized into four datasets (dataset 1–dataset 4).
The workflow for miRNA sequencing is illustrated in
Fig. 1
. It includes steps such as Total RNA sample testing, ligation of 3′ and 5′ end connectors, double-stranded cDNA synthesis, PCR enrichment, PAGE gel electrophoretic separation, fragment selection, library quality inspection, and on-machine sequencing. Dataset 1 comprises three files. The first file, “Readcount_TPM.xlsx,” lists all known and novel miRNAs identified in the two samples and their expression levels. In the SDNV-D group samples, 52 known miRNAs across 9 miRNA families were identified, while in the SDNV-F group samples, 110 known miRNAs from 28 miRNA families were found. In the SDNV-D group, 48 novel miRNAs were predicted; however, only four were consistently identified across all three replicate experiments, and these had relatively high expression levels. In the SDNV-F group, 45 novel miRNAs were predicted, with 16 detected in all three replicates. The second file, “The known miRNA sequence.xlsx,” provides sequence information for all known miRNAs in the two samples. The third file, “The novel miRNA sequence.xlsx,” contains sequence data for all novel miRNAs in the samples. We used miRanda software to predict human target genes of all sequenced miRNAs, referencing the Ensembl_106 genome (URL:
http://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-106/fasta/homo_sapiens/dna/
). Target gene prediction required meeting the following criteria: (a) perfect base pairing between the seed region (positions 2 to 8 of mature miRNAs) and the target sequence; and (b) an energy threshold for hybridization less than -25 kcal/mol.
Table 1
lists the predicted target genes for the top 10 miRNAs with the highest expression levels.
Fig. 1
Library Construction and Sequencing Workflow Diagram of miRNA Sequencing.
Fig 1
Table 1
Target genes of the top 10 expressed miRNAs.
Table 1
miRNA name
Binding energy
Target gene name
ptc-miR6478
-29.08
KAZN
ath-miR396b-5p
-29.96
VASH1
vvi-miR396b
-28.86
VASH1
vvi-miR396a
-30.06
VASH1
ath-miR396a-5p
-29.36
ERRFI1
gma-miR396h
-30.11
NUPR1
zma-miR396g-3p
-27.38
ANKRD12
ath-miR159a
-28.47
CNOT9
ath-miR159b-3p
-27.59
TEX13C
Dataset 2 contains two files. The first file, “metabolin.xlsx,” lists all identified metabolites in the two samples and their expression abundances. A total of 1132 metabolites were detected in both positive and negative ion modes, and the ion flow diagrams for these modes are shown in
Fig. 2
A. The second file, “metabolin KEGG stat.xlsx,” presents the KEGG enrichment analysis of the identified metabolites, which are enriched in numerous pathways related to human diseases, cellular processes, and metabolism.
Fig. 2
Ion flow diagrams for non-targeted metabolomics and lipidomics sequencing. (A) Ion flow diagram of non-targeted metabolomics sequencing in positive and negative ion modes. (B) Ion flow diagram of non-targeted lipidomics sequencing in positive and negative ion modes.
Fig 2
Dataset 3 includes two files. The first file, “lipid.xlsx”, lists all the lipid types identified in the two samples and their expression levels. A total of 1436 lipid components were detected in both positive and negative ion modes, and the ion flow diagrams for these modes are shown in
Fig. 2
B. The second file, “lipid KEGG stat.xlsx”, presents the KEGG enrichment analysis of the lipids identified in the two samples, highlighting enrichment in many pathways related to human diseases.
Dataset 4 contains three files. The first file, “protein.xlsx,” includes all proteins identified in the SDNV-F samples and their expression levels; 4099 protein components were identified in SDNV-F. Due to the denaturation of proteins extracted from SDNV-D after high-temperature treatment, no proteins in SDNV-D could be identified through sequencing. The second file, named “protein_detailed_info.xlsx,” provides comprehensive supplementary information for each identified protein in SDNV-F, including protein score, sequence coverage, total number of matching peptides, number of unique peptides, mean abundance ± standard deviation of each protein per group, and fold change ratios of protein expression between different groups—this information is intended to assist readers in evaluating the reliability of protein identification results and analyzing differences in protein expression across samples. The third file, “protein enrichment.KEGG.xlsx,” contains the KEGG enrichment analysis of the proteins identified in SDNV-F, and the enriched pathways include the phosphatidylinositol signaling system, glycolipid phosphate metabolism, fatty acid lipid metabolism, linolenic acid metabolism, etc.
Through sequencing analysis and comparison of two Salvia miltiorrhiza-derived nanovesicles, apparent differences and some similarities in their molecular makeup, component stability, and pathways linked to potential biological functions can be observed. These molecular-level comparisons not only clarify how Salvia miltiorrhiza rhizome processing methods (fresh versus dried decoction) influence the core molecular composition of its nanovesicles but also offer a comprehensive and critical foundation for future targeted studies on the biological activity mechanisms of Salvia miltiorrhiza nanovesicles from different sources, the identification of disease intervention targets, and the optimization of the nanovesicle preparation process.
4
Experimental Design, Materials, and Methods
4.1
Isolation of SDNV-D and SDNV-F
Both dried and fresh Salvia miltiorrhiza roots were cultivated in Tangshan, Hebei Province, with a one-year growth cycle, and were obtained from Hebei Hezhou Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The dried Salvia miltiorrhiza roots were decocted using the traditional Chinese medicine to extract a liquid from Salvia miltiorrhiza. In contrast, fresh roots were processed by low-temperature juicing to extract their juice. Nanovesicles were then isolated from both preparations through ultra-high-speed differential and sucrose gradient centrifugation. For the differential centrifugation, samples were sequentially spun at 3000 × g for 20 minutes and 12000 × g for 40 minutes at 4°C, with the supernatant transferred to a high-speed centrifuge tube. The supernatant was centrifuged at 120,000 × g for 1 hour and 40 minutes at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in PBS, filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane, and centrifuged at 120,000 × g for 1 hour and 40 minutes at 4°C. The final pellet was resuspended in PBS and stored at -80°C. The sucrose gradient centrifugation also involved centrifugation at 3000 × g for 20 minutes and 12000 × g for 40 minutes at 4°C, followed by collecting the supernatant, which was loaded into a high-speed centrifuge tube. This was centrifuged at 120,000 × g at 4°C for 1 hour and 40 minutes. The precipitate was resuspended in an appropriate amount of PBS and transferred to a tube containing 8%, 30%, 45%, and 60% sucrose solutions to establish a gradient. After centrifugation at 120,000 × g for 1 hour and 40 minutes, the intermediate layer between 30% and 45% sucrose was collected, diluted with PBS, and centrifuged again at 120,000 × g at 4°C for 1 hour and 40 minutes. The resulting pellet was resuspended in PBS and stored at -80°C.
4.2
sRNA high-throughput sequencing
RNA extracted from nanovesicles was isolated using the exoRNeasy Maxi Kit (Qiagen, Cat: 77164). RNA degradation and contamination were checked with 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. The purity of RNA was assessed with a Nano Photometer® spectrophotometer (IMPLEN, CA, USA), and concentration was determined using the Qubit™ RNA Assay Kit in the Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies, CA, USA). RNA integrity was evaluated using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 with the RNA Nano 6000 detection kit (Agilent, CA, USA).
Library construction was performed using the Small RNA Sample Pre Kit, leveraging the structural features of small RNAs with a 5′ phosphate and 3′ hydroxyl group. Total RNA was the starting material, with adapters directly ligated to both ends. Reverse transcription and PCR amplification followed. PAGE separated target fragments, recovered from the gel, and purified to form the cDNA library. Quantification was done with Qubit 2.0, and the library was diluted to 1 ng/µL. Insert size verification was conducted with the Agilent 2100, and library concentration was validated by qPCR. Libraries with an effective concentration above 2 nM met sequencing requirements. Qualified libraries were combined and sequenced on the Illumina SE50 platform.
4.3
Metabolome sequencing
The collected samples were thawed on ice, and metabolites were extracted with 80% methanol Buffer. Briefly, 50 mg of the sample was extracted with 0.5 ml of precooled 80% methanol. The extraction mixture was then stored for 30 min at -20°C. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min, the supernatants were transferred into a new tube and vacuum dried. The samples were redissolved with 100 µL 80% methanol and stored at -80°C prior to the LC-MS analysis. In addition, pooled QC samples were also prepared by combining 10 µL of each extraction mixture. All samples were acquired by the LC-MS system, following machine orders. Firstly, all chromatographic separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 UPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An ACQUITY UPLC T3 column (100mm*2.1mm, 1.8µm, Waters, Milford, USA) was used for the reversed-phase separation. The column oven was maintained at 40°C, followed by the addition of 5 mM ammonium acetate and 5 mM acetic acid, and solvent B (acetonitrile). low rate was 0.3 ml/min and the mobile phase consisted of solvent A . Gradient elution conditions were set as follows: 0–0.8 min, 2% B; 0.8–2.8 min, 2% to 70% B; 2.8–5.6 min, 70% to 90% B; 5.6∼6.4 min, 90% to 100% B; 6.4∼8.0 min, 100% B; 8.0–8.1 min, 100% to 2% B; 8.1–10 min, 2% B. Metabolites eluted from the column were detected using a high-resolution tandem mass spectrometer TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). The Q-TOF operated in both positive and negative ion modes. The curtain gas was set to 30 PSI, ion source gas 1 and ion source gas 2 were each set to 60 PSI, and the interface heater temperature was 500°C. For the positive ion mode, the ion spray floating voltage was set to 5000 V. For the negative ion mode, the ion spray floating voltage was set to -4500 V. Mass spectrometry data were acquired in Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode. The TOF mass range was 60–1200 Da. A survey scan was acquired within 150 milliseconds, and up to 12 product ion scans were collected if the threshold of 100 counts per second (cps) was exceeded and the charge state was 1+. Dynamic exclusion was set to 4 seconds. Mass accuracy calibration was performed for every 20 samples during the acquisition process. Additionally, to evaluate the stability of the LC-MS system throughout the entire acquisition process, a quality control (QC) sample (pooled sample) was collected after every 10 samples.
The acquired mass spectrometry data were preprocessed using XCMS software, including peak picking, peak grouping, retention time correction, secondary peak grouping, and isotope and adduct annotation. LC-MS raw data files were converted to mzXML format, followed by processing using the XCMS, CAMERA, and metaX toolboxes implemented in R software. Each ion was identified by combining retention time (RT) and m/z data. The intensity of each peak was recorded, and a three-dimensional matrix was generated, which contained the arbitrarily designated peak index (retention time-m/z pair), sample name (observation), and ion intensity information (variable). Metabolites were annotated using the online KEGG and HMDB databases, where the accurate molecular mass data (m/z) of the samples were matched with the data in the databases. If the mass difference between the observed value and the database value was less than 10 ppm, the metabolite was annotated; furthermore, the molecular formula of the metabolite was further identified and verified through isotope distribution measurement. We also used an in-house database to validate metabolite identification.
4.4
Lipidome sequencing
The collected samples were thawed on ice, and metabolites were extracted using a lipid extraction buffer. Briefly, 100 mg of sample was extracted with 1 mL of pre-chilled lipid extraction buffer (IPA: ACN: H₂O = 2:1:1), vortexed for 1 minute, and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes; the extract was stored at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4000 × g for 20 minutes, the supernatant was transferred to a new 96-well plate. Samples were stored at -80°C prior to LC-MS analysis. Meanwhile, 10 µL of each extract was added separately to prepare a pooled QC sample. The LC-MS system acquired all samples in accordance with the instrument instructions. First, all chromatographic separations were performed using an ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Reversed-phase separation was carried out using a Kinetex UPLC C18 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 100 A, Phenomenex, UK). The column oven was maintained at 55°C. The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min, and the mobile phases consisted of solvent A (ACN: H₂O = 6:4, with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (IPA: ACN = 9:1, with 0.1% formic acid). The gradient elution conditions were set as follows: 0–0.4 min, 30% B; 0.4–1 min, 30% – 45% B; 1–3 min, 45% – 60% B; 3.5–5 min, 60% – 75% B; 5–7 min, 75% – 90% B; 7–8.5 min, 90% – 100% B; 8.5–8.6 min, 100% B; 8.6–8.61 min, 100% – 30% B; 8.61–10 min, 30% B. A high-resolution tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) was used to detect metabolites eluted from the column. The Q-Exactive operated in both positive and negative ion modes. Precursor spectra (70–1050 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms. Data acquisition was configured for the top 3 selection in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Fragment spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. To evaluate the stability of the LC-MS system throughout the entire acquisition process, a quality control (QC) sample (pooled sample) was acquired after every 10 samples.
The information analysis workflow is the same as that of untargeted metabolomics
4.5
Proteome sequencing
An appropriate amount of sample was placed into a 2 mL centrifuge tube, and lysis was performed using an 8 M urea/50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing protease inhibitors. The mixture was incubated on ice and centrifuged at 20,000 × g at 4°C. DTT (Dithiothreitol, 10 mM) was added and incubated in a water bath at 37°C for 1 hour, followed by IAA (Iodoacetamide) (20 mM) for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins (150 µg) were enzymatically digested with trypsin (3 µg) at 37°C for 16 hours. Peptides were desalted through solid-phase extraction, vacuum dried, and stored at -20°C.
Lyophilized peptide samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA), centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was collected for injection. Separation was performed using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC™ 1200 system. The samples were loaded onto a self-packed C18 column (100 µm inner diameter, 1.8 µm particle size, and approximately 35 cm column length) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with the following effective gradient: 0–103 min: 4% Mobile Phase B (98% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA) was linearly increased to 27%; 103–111 min: Mobile Phase B was increased from 27% to 40%; 111–113 min: Mobile Phase B was increased from 40% to 90%; 113–120 min: 90% Mobile Phase B was maintained. Peptides separated by liquid chromatography were ionized via a nanoESI (nano-electrospray ionization) source and then analyzed using an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. The main parameter settings were as follows: Full-scan MS range: 350–1,500 m/z; Resolution: set to 120,000; Normalized AGC Target: set to 300%; In DIA mode: the mass range of 400–1,200 m/z was evenly divided into 53 windows for continuous window fragmentation and signal acquisition; Ion fragmentation mode: Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with fragmentation energy set to 32%; Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with resolution set to 30,000 and Normalized AGC Target set to 200%.
DIA mass spectrometry data were subjected to protein search, identification, and quantitative analysis using DIA-NN software (
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0638-x
) (Version 1.8). The key parameters of DIA-NN were as follows: the protein identification mode was DirectDIA (no actual DDA data was required to construct a spectral library; instead, an informatics-based approach was used to build a theoretical virtual spectral library from the protein sequence library of the corresponding species); the enzymatic digestion parameter was set to Trypsin/P, with a maximum number of missed cleavages of 2; the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), and the variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term); the protein identification confidence strategy was Target-decoy, and the protein identification thresholds were set as follows: peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (PSM FDR) < 0.01 and protein FDR < 0.01.
Limitations
This study examined the differences in miRNAs, metabolites, and proteins between nanovesicles derived from dried and fresh Salvia miltiorrhiza roots. However, the raw materials were limited to 1-year-old dried and fresh Salvia miltiorrhiza from a single manufacturer in Tangshan, Hebei Province. This limitation prevented coverage and comparison of samples from different regions, multiple growth cycles, and various processing techniques. Several objective obstacles exist: 1. Obtaining Salvia miltiorrhiza samples from authentic producing areas requires coordinating supply chains across multiple regions, which is limited by geographical constraints; 2. Salvia miltiorrhiza with different growth cycles requires long-term cultivation, surpassing the duration of this study; 3. Specialized processing methods can change the components of Salvia miltiorrhiza, and specific extraction procedures for fresh or dried nanovesicles need to be developed. Currently, established protocols for isolating nanovesicles from processed Salvia miltiorrhiza are lacking. These issues prevent comprehensive coverage and comparison of such diverse samples, making it difficult to rule out the influence of raw material source differences on the composition of SDNVs.
Ethics Statement
This work does not involve human subjects or animal experiments.
Credit Author Statement
S.-J.A. and R.-Y.W. designed the project, analyzed the data, and prepared the manuscript; R.-Y.W., Z.R., H.-T.X., W.-Y.Z., and X.-Y.Z. performed experiments and interpreted the data; S.-J.A. and R.-Y.W. provided bioinformatics analysis; J.K. provided non-targeted metabolites determination and analysis; Z.-F.C. provided RNA isolation and qRT-PCR detection and histological analysis; R.-Y.W., Z.R., W.-Y.Z., and X.-Y.Z. and K.J. prepared SDNVs and Determination; S.-J.A. and R.-Y.W. performed RNA sequencing and data analysis; S.-J.A., R.-Y.W., and J.K. interpreted the findings.