Introduction
Since the establishment of the self-organizing
stem cell-driven
spheroid and organoid cultures, there has been a surge in their use
in biomedical research, overcoming the reliance on traditional cell
lines and animal model systems.
1
,
2
Organoids are currently
one of the most versatile and complex three-dimensional culture systems
that replicate tissue heterogeneity and cellular and molecular composition
in an in vitro environment.
3
−
7
The growing necessity for the comprehensive characterization of
diverse organoid models has led to a higher demand for innovative
analytical tools. These tools are essential to gain deeper insights
into the intricate heterogeneous cellular compositions and molecular
processes in organoids. Targeted imaging techniques such as confocal
microscopy are widely used for the imaging of organoids. This analytical
tool relies on methods involving immunolabeling or fluorescent reporter
genes.
8
,
9
Confocal microscopy allows for high spatial
resolution down to 200 nm
9
but is limited
to only a few preselected targets due to the spectral overlap of the
fluorophores.
10
Therefore, biological information
is easily missed in this targeted approach.
Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging
(MALDI-MSI) is an analytical tool that detects, localizes, and identifies
molecules in an untargeted, label-free manner. Researchers from diverse
backgrounds have explored its use in visualizing 3D culture systems,
such as spheroids.
11
−
15
In contrast, the application of MALDI-MSI for different organoid
phenotypes has not yet been thoroughly explored yet. Spheroids are
generally cultured in a nonadherent manner (floating), whereas organoid
cultures typically rely on a basement membrane extract (BME) for sustaining
growth.
7
Consequently, the isolation of
floating spheroids is generally less intricate in comparison to BME-cultured
organoids, which reside within the BME matrix and require more intricate
isolation methods for ex vivo imaging modalities. A recent study demonstrated
a method for the isolation and imaging of lipids in pancreatic ductal
cancer organoids (PDAC) with the use of MALDI-MSI.
16
Although significant effort has been made to demonstrate
the utility of MALDI-MSI for imaging lipids in PDACs, its applicability
to other, more fragile, organoids models, such as small intestinal
organoids (SIOs), has not been demonstrated. Organoid sample preparation
for MALDI-MSI requires elaborate washing steps that can compromise
the structural integrity of the organoids. Current embedding protocols
of organoids could present additional challenges related to analyte
delocalization and histological evaluation.
17
,
18
As a result, assessment of organoid morphology using hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining is hindered due to the stained degraded
collagen present in the gelatin-embedding matrix.
19
An alternative method for embedding and preserving
biological specimens
is formalin fixation and paraffin embedment (FFPE). Although commonly
used for routine clinical diagnostics,
20
,
21
the use of
FFPE is not ideal for MSI. Besides the possibility of ion suppression
from the paraffin, lipids can form a cross-link with formalin, causing
class-specific depletion of lipid ion signals in formalin-fixed tissues.
22
−
24
Therefore, fresh-frozen material is preferred for MALDI-MSI. Other
traditional embedding compounds such as optimal cutting temperature
(OCT) matrix are known to interfere with MALDI-MSI experiments.
25
Recently, a study demonstrated the use of Epredia
M-1 embedding matrix (M-1), a cellulose-based embedding medium, to
be a suitable substitute for embedding specimens with high water content,
such as eyeballs.
26
Compounds such as M-1
offer exciting prospects for embedding and imaging organoids because
of their user-friendly characteristics. Additionally, M-1 embedding
could provide a significant advantage over conventional embedding
compounds by minimizing the risk of analyte delocalization during
sample preparation and ensuring optimal visualization of organoid
morphology.
In this study, we aimed to optimize the sample preparation
protocol
of organoids with M-1 to preserve structural integrity, minimize analyte
delocalization, enhance evaluation of organoid morphology, and
ensure compatibility with MALDI-MSI. This approach allows the detection
and visualization of spatial distributions of lipids in SIOs at a
single-cell level (5 μm) in both positive and negative ion polarity.
Additionally, M-1 was demonstrated to be compatible with histological
and immunohistochemical (IHC) stainings, including MALDI-IHC, where
it displayed reduced analyte delocalization and improved (histological)
imaging compared to gelatin-embedded samples. This allows for easier
coregistration between the images and the possibility of combining
untargeted and targeted spatial information. Second, we assessed the
applicability of our optimized method for phenotyping crypt-like (CL)
and villus-like (VL) human SIOs. This approach allows us to gain valuable
insights into cellular heterogeneity and reveal metabolic differences
between SIO phenotypes.
Methods
Human Intestinal Tissue and Ethics
Healthy intestinal
tissue specimens were obtained from a patient (age 69, male) during
a pancreaticoduodenectomy at RWTH Aachen University Hospital. The
ethics committee of RWTH Aachen approved this study (EK 206/09), and
written informed consent was obtained for study participation.
Organoid Culture and Differentiation
SIOs were generated
from isolated intestinal crypts, cultured, and passaged as previously
described.
27
,
28
Briefly, intestinal crypts were
resuspended in basement membrane extract (Geltrex, LDEV-free reduced
growth factor basement membrane matrix; Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) and plated
in 24-well plates (50 μL of Geltrex per well). Organoids were
cultured in growth medium (GM), which consisted of Advanced Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium F12 (Gibco) supplemented with Pen/Strep
(50 units/mL penicillin and 50 μg/mL streptomycin) (Gibco),
10 mM HEPES (Gibco), and 1× Glutamax (Gibco), with 1× N2
(Gibco), 1× B27 (Gibco) and 50% (v/v) Wnt3a-conditioned medium,
20% (v/v) Rspondin-1-conditioned medium, 10% (v/v) Noggin-conditioned
medium, 10 mM Nicotinamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), 50 ng/mL
murine EGF (Gibco), 1.25 mM N-acetyl cystein (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM
Gastrin I (Sigma-Aldrich), 500 nM (TGFβ inhibitor) A83-01 (Sigma-Aldrich),
and 10 μM (p38 MAPK inhibitor) SB202190 (Sigma-Aldrich). Differentiation
of SIOs was accomplished with differentiation medium (DM), which contained
components similar to GM without supplementing the Wnt3a-conditioned
medium, Nicotinamide, SB202190, and a 50% reduction of Rspondin-1-
and Noggin-conditioned medium. CL organoids were cultured for 12 days
in GM medium, whereas VL organoids were cultured for 7 days in GM
and 5 days in DM.
28
Organoid Isolation, Embedding, and Sectioning
The protocols
for collection and embedding SIOs were based on an established protocol
for PDAC organoids.
16
Instructions were
followed as described in this protocol for isolating and embedding
SIOs. A comparison was made with organoids collected in cell recovery
solution (CRS, Corning) instead of 1× phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) (without CaCl
2
and MgCl
2
, Life Technologies).
In short, cell culture medium was aspirated, and 1 mL of cold (4 °C)
CRS or 1× PBS was added to each well. Next, the Geltrex domes
were gently collected with a plastic Pasteur pipet (Copan Italia 204C),
transferred to a 15 mL Eppendorf Tube (Eppendorf), and left incubating
on ice (4 °C) for 20 min. Then, all samples were centrifuged
for 5 min at 25
g
at 4 °C, and excessive CRS
or 1× PBS was aspirated. Excess Geltrex was removed, and organoid
pellets were resuspended in 10 mL of 1× PBS, incubated on ice
for 20–30 min (inverted every 5 min), and centrifuged for 5
min at 25
g
at 4 °C. These steps were repeated
until all Geltrex was removed from the organoid pellet.
The
remaining organoid pellet was gently resuspended with 5 mL of cold
50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, NH
4
CO
3
, Sigma-Aldrich)
and centrifuged for 5 min at 25
g
at 4 °C. ABC
was aspirated, and organoid pellets were embedded in either preheated
(37 °C) 15% gelatin from porcine skin (Sigma-Aldrich) or Epredia
M-1 Embedding Matrix (carboxymethylcellulose, M-1, Epredia). Briefly,
organoid pellets were resuspended in 400–600 μL of gelatin
or M-1 and carefully mixed with a cut off 200 μL pipet tip.
The organoid suspensions were transferred to a cryo-mold and covered
with a small piece of cork (1.5 mm thick). Gelatin-embedded organoids
were frozen in cold isopentane (on dry ice), and the M-1-embedded
organoids were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (floating, not submerged)
for 10 s. Samples were kept on dry ice until they were transferred
for storage at −80 °C until further processing.
Additional organoid samples were collected (from each condition)
for lipid identification using tandem mass spectrometry (MS
2
). A small volume (50–75 μL) was extracted from the
(clean) resuspended organoid pellets in ABC solution and transferred
to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf Tube. The samples were centrifuged at 300
g
for 1 min at 4 °C, and ABC solution was aspirated.
The remaining pellet was resuspended in 100–150 μL of
ABC solution. Organoids were disrupted by manual pipetting and vortexing.
A small volume was spotted (50 μL) on a clean indium tin oxide
(ITO)-coated glass slide (Delta Technologies Ltd., Loveland, CO) and
dried on a heating plate until all liquid was evaporated.
Embedded
organoids were sectioned at 12 μm thickness at −14
°C (M-1) and −19 °C (Gelatin) using a cryostat (Microm
HM525, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Organoid sections were
thaw mounted onto clean ITO-coated glass slides for MALDI-MSI and
adhesive StarFrost glass slides (Knittel Glass, GmbH, Braunschweig,
Germany) for (immuno) histological stainings. Tissue slides were stored
at −80 °C until further analysis.
MALDI-MSI and Data Analysis
Before sample preparation,
the slides were defrosted in a silica carrier box to avoid condensation.
The slides were washed in 50 mM Ammonium formate (4 °C, Sigma-Aldrich)
for 15 s in a Petri dish and dried in a desiccator for 30 min. Norharmane
matrix (80 mg, Sigma-Aldrich) was sublimed (HTX Sublimator, HTX Technologies,
Chapel Hill, NC) at 140 °C for 180 s. MALDI-MSI analysis was
performed on a RapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper (Bruker Daltonics GmbH Bremen,
Germany) operating in reflectron mode. Data were obtained in positive
and negative ion modes with a mass range of
m
/
z
300–1600 and a pixel size of 5 μm. The laser
frequency was set to 5000 Hz, and 100 shots were accumulated at each
pixel. Time-of-flight calibration was performed by using red phosphorus.
FlexImaging version 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and
SCiLS lab 2023c (SCiLS GmbH, Bremen, Germany) were used for processing
the imaging data.
Lipid Identification
MS
2
experiments were
performed on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher
Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a MALDI-ESI injector
(Spectroglyph, LLC, Kennewick, WA).
29
Full
MS spectra were acquired using 550 ms injection time in both polarities
at 1000 Hz and 7.5 Torr (
Figures S1 and S2
). For each precursor mass, 20 spectra were acquired using 2000 ms
injection time while manually moving the MALDI stage at 0.5 mm/s.
Precursors were selected using a ±0.5 Da isolation window and
fragmented in a higher-energy collisional dissociation cell using
a normalized collision energy between 20 and 30 (manufacturer units).
All spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 240,000 (fwhm at
m
/
z
200), and fragments were matched using
the ALEX
123
lipid calculator. Xcalibur 3.0.16 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and mMass v5.5.0 were used for processing
the spectra (
Figures S3–S7
).
MALDI-IHC
Sections were stained with pan cytokeratin
(panCK) PC-MT antibody probe (Ambergen Inc., Boston, MA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions.
30
Briefly, sections were fixed using 1% paraformaldehyde for 30 min,
followed by multiple washing steps with PBS, acetone, and Carnoy’s
solution. Sections were rehydrated, followed by incubation with 2%
(v/v) normal mouse serum and blocked with a 0.05% octyl β-
d
-Glucopyranoside, 5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) in 1×
tris-buffered saline (TBS) for 1 h. Sections were stained with the
PC-MT antibody probe with a final concentration of 2 μg/mL overnight
at 4 °C in a humidified chamber protected from light. Next, slides
were washed with 1× TBS and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The PC-MT
was photocleaved by illumination of UV light at 365 nm (Phrozen UV
curing lamp, Phrozen Tech Co., Ltd., Hsinchu City, Taiwan) for 10
min (3 mW/cm
2
). 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) matrix
(50 mg, Sigma) was sublimed (HTX Sublimator, HTX Technologies) at
160 °C for 160 s, followed by recrystallization in an oven (50
°C for 90 s) using a Petri dish containing 0.5% ethanol in water.
MALDI-IHC analysis was performed on a RapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper using
the reflectron mode in positive polarity. The laser frequency was
set to 5000 Hz, and 500 shots were recorded at each pixel. The pixel
size was set to 10 μm.
Immunohistochemistry and Histological Staining
Frozen
organoid sections were dried in a desiccator for 10 min, followed
by fixation in ice-cold acetone (−20 °C) for 10 min. Tissue
slides were rinsed twice in 1× PBS, followed by blocking endogenous
peroxidase activity with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol (H
2
O
2
/MeOH) for 15 min. Next, slides were washed twice
in 1× PBS and permeabilized with 0.1% NP-40 (in 1× PBS)
for 10 min. The tissue slides were dried and marked with a hydrophobic
mini PAP pen (Agar Scientific, Stansted, U.K., Art. No. AGL4197M),
and nonspecific antibody binding was blocked with 5% BSA (in 1×
PBS) for 30 min. Sections were incubated with the primary antibody
overnight at 4 °C. Next, tissue slides were washed twice with
1× PBS and incubated with the biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies
for 30 min. This was followed by incubation with an avidin–biotin
complex (VectorLabs, Burlingame, CA) for 30 min. Antibody binding
was visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB; Dako, Glostrup,
Denmark), and counterstaining was performed with hematoxylin (Merck
KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). Organoid sections were dehydrated and mounted
with Entellan (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA). The antibodies used
were Cytokeratin (PanCK, Wide Spectrum, 1:400, Rabbit, Dako) and secondary
(biotin-labeled) antibody anti-rabbit (Dako, 1:500).
Alkaline
phosphatase staining was used to visualize the brush border enzymes
expressed by intestinal enterocytes. Organoid sections were incubated
with a mixture of 4-Nitro blue tetrazolium chloride, 4-toluidine salt,
and alkaline phosphate buffer and left incubating in a humid chamber
at 37 °C for 30 min. Alcian blue staining was used to stain acidic
mucins in goblet cells. In short, organoid sections were incubated
in 3% acetic acid for 3 min, followed by an Alcian blue solution for
30 min at RT. Both stainings were counterstained with Nuclearfast
Red for 5 min and mounted with Entellan. Standard protocols were followed
to counterstain for measured MALDI-MSI and MALDI-IHC slides with hematoxylin
and Eosin (H&E, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). The Aperio CS2
scanner (Leica Microsystems, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) was used
for whole slide scanning and digitalization at a 20× magnification.
Results and Discussion
Collection and Sample Processing of SIOs
SIOs are generally
cultured in a type of BME containing a unique mix of ECM components
and growth factors that allow the cells to grow in a 3D structure
(
Figure
1
). The BME
provides the necessary environment for organoid establishment, expansion,
and long-term culture but, unfortunately, creates a barrier in sample
preparation for MALDI-MSI.
16
Previously,
a novel method was described for isolating and embedding PDAC organoids
for lipid identification with MALDI-MSI.
16
Similar to PDAC organoids, SIOs have a hollow lumen with a thin
single-cell layer but contain different cell types. Typical CL SIOs
grow as multilobular or cystic organoid structures, mainly containing
intestinal stem cells and Paneth cells. For the generation of differentiated
or VL SIOs, organoids are cultured in a differentiation medium for
5 days, generating enterocytes and goblet cells.
28
Therefore, the recovery of SIOs is predicted to differ
from that of PDAC organoids based on their size, origin, and morphology.
Figure 1
Overview
of collection and embedding workflow of human SIOs. The
organoids were incubated with either cell recovery solution (CRS)
or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by multiple washing steps
to remove the excess buffer and Geltrex. Samples were embedded using
either Epredia M-1 embedding matrix or 15% gelatin and snap-frozen.
Our primary aim was to optimize the sample preparation
method to
improve organoid recovery and preserve their morphology. The protocol
presents a significant challenge due to multiple washing and centrifugation
steps. Repetitive washing with PBS and centrifugation is necessary
to remove excessive BME but could easily damage SIOs due to their
fragile structure. An improved approach to prevent this damage includes
a short incubation with CRS, which carefully disintegrates the BME
(
Figure
1
). This is
followed by a PBS wash and centrifugation at a lower centrifugal force
of 25
g
(previously 100
g
). One major
advantage of the CRS protocol is its significantly shorter duration
compared with the PBS protocol. This not only saves time but also
minimizes modification of the original sample.
Next, SIOs were
embedded in M-1 and compared to those embedded
in a 15% porcine skin gelatin solution. M-1 is a clear and water-soluble
solution that allows organoids to be easily embedded and frozen. Furthermore,
unlike gelatin solutions, M-1 does not require preheating, which avoids
lipid delocalization in the samples or damage of the organoid structure.
We compared the original
16
and adapted
protocols to determine their usability for collecting and analyzing
SIOs with MALDI-MSI.
Enhanced Histological Evaluation of SIOs and Improved Lipid
Detection via MALDI-MSI
Human SIOs were cultured for 12 days,
which resulted in the formation of a heterogeneous population of CL
organoids (
Figure
2
A). A higher yield of organoids and better-preserved organoid morphology
in the CRS-treated samples compared to only PBS-treated organoids
were obtained (
Figure
2
B). Histological assessment of gelatin-embedded organoid samples
proved to be more challenging due to the simultaneous staining of
the gelatin, resulting in a uniformly pink-stained background. This
complicates the identification of the single-cell epithelial layer
of SIOs in gelatin, which could interfere with future colocalization
of morphological organoid structures and lipid profiles. Intriguingly,
we found that CRS-treated M-1-embedded samples had a better-preserved
organoid morphology, which facilitated an easier distinction of different
SIOs features compared to gelatin-embedded samples. As mentioned before,
M-1 embedding matrix does not require preheating and is liquid at
room temperature. Gelatin-based embedding requires a temperature of
37 °C for liquefaction. During sample collection and removal
of excess BME, organoid samples must remain cold (4 °C) to inhibit
metabolic activity and prevent degradation. The M-1 embedding matrix
proves advantageous because it is readily accessible, affordable,
and usable in a straightforward manner, without the need of heating
or pretreatment requirements compared to gelatin embedding of SIOs.
From the data, it is evident that the utilization of M-1 embedding,
as opposed to gelatin, presents a more favorable approach for assessing
organoid morphology and streamlining histological coregistration.
Figure 2
Comparison
of small intestinal organoids after PBS or CRS treatment
and embedding in gelatin (Gel) or M-1 embedding matrix. (A) Brightfield
images representing different phenotypes of 12-day-old human crypt-like
(CL) SIOs. The growth of human CL organoids results in a heterogeneous
population, with differing sizes among them. Scale bars: 500 μm
(top) and 250 μm (bottom) panels. (B) Representative images
of embedded organoid sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
for different organoid isolation and embedding protocols (scale bar:
300 μm). (C) Heterogeneous distribution of phosphatidylcholines
(PC) displayed in CL SIO’s in different sample preparation
methods: (blue)
m
/
z
788.6 (PC 36:1
[M + H]
+
) and (yellow)
m
/
z
732.6 (PC 32:1 [M + H]
+
) measured in positive ion mode
(scale bar: 500 μm). (D) Images obtained in negative polarity
revealed heterogeneous distributions of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)
at (pink)
m
/
z
742.6 (PE 36:2 [M
– H]
−
) and phosphatidylinositol (PI) at (green)
m
/
z
836.6 (PI 36:1 [M – H]
−
). Scale bar: 500 μm. All measurements were conducted on consecutive
sections obtained from a single-patient-derived SIO line.
MALDI-MSI analysis was performed on adjacent organoid
sections
to compare lipid detection in both positive and negative polarities
(
Figure
2
C,D). Spectra
in positive polarity revealed a heterogeneous distribution of phosphatidylcholines
m
/
z
732.6 (PC 32:1 [M + H]
+
)
and
m
/
z
788.6 (PC 36:1 [M + H]
+
) in the organoids (
Figure
2
C). Organoids embedded in gelatin exhibited a higher
lipid delocalization compared to that of M-1-embedded organoids (
Figure
2
C, GEL-CRS). Analyte
delocalization is a common problem caused by the sample preparation
process.
17
,
18
Organoids were washed and centrifuged during
sample preparation in an ABC solution. Complete aspiration of the
remaining solution is complicated without disrupting the organoid
pellet. Hence, the remaining organoid pellet has a high water content
due to the remaining BME and ABC solution. This could result in the
formation of water droplets and, in combination with heterogeneous
heat conduction, cause analyte delocalization.
18
,
31
Similar to the positive ion mode, data in negative polarity revealed
heterogeneous distributions of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)
at
m
/
z
742.6 (PE 36:2 [M –
H]
−
) and phosphatidylinositol (PI) at
m
/
z
836.6 (PI 36:1 [M – H]
−
). In addition, distinct analyte delocalization was found in the
gelatin-embedded samples, especially in the CRS-treated organoid sample
(
Figure
2
D, GEL-CRS).
CRS is a nonenzymatic proprietary solution often used to depolymerize
BME matrices. However, the composition of CRS is unknown, and prolonged
exposure to organoids might compromise organoid morphology or could
cleave membrane and adhesive molecules.
16
Still, the use of CRS improved the SIO morphology compared to PBS-only
washed samples. Nonetheless, it is essential to optimize the CRS incubation
for other organoid culture systems to avoid potential structural degradation
during sample preparation.
Characterization of CL and VL Human SIOs by MALDI-MSI
We examined the applicability of our optimized isolation and embedding
method (M-1, CRS) to distinguish different SIO phenotypes. CL and
VL organoids represent different cellular compositions and functions
within the intestinal epithelium, making them a valuable tool for
investigating specific aspects of intestinal biology and disease modeling.
28
In short, CL and VL organoids were generated
and isolated after 12 days of culture (
Figure
3
A).
28
CL organoids
comprised a predominantly cystic population with a visually clear
organoid lumen, whereas VL organoids had a more lobular structure
with a darker lumen containing cell debris (
Figure
3
A, brightfield). Additionally, VL organoids
had a denser and darker morphology in comparison to CL organoids.
We performed MALDI-MSI in negative ion mode, where several lipid species
were visualized and identified (
Figure
3
A, MALDI-MSI). Here, PE 36:2 [M – H]
−
(
m
/
z
742.5) and PI 38:4 [M –
H]
−
(
m
/
z
885.5)
showed a more pronounced abundance in CL organoids compared to heterogeneous
levels in VL organoids. In addition, PI 36:1 [M – H]
−
(
m
/
z
863.6) was more abundant
in the VL organoids. These results show that the new isolation and
embedding method allows analysis of different lipids classes at high
spatial resolution in different SIO phenotypes. Next, a series of
histochemical stainings were applied on consecutive slides to confirm
the differentiation state of the organoids. H&E staining revealed
that most CL organoids consisted of a single-cell epithelial layer.
On the other hand, VL organoids exhibited a more distinct morphology
resembling villus-like structures, characterized by a thicker epithelial
cell layer (
Figure
3
A, H&E staining). A positive staining of the brush border enzyme
alkaline phosphate (purple) confirmed the presence of mature enterocytes
in VL organoids, which were absent in CL organoids (
Figure
3
A, alkaline phosphatase). Alcian
blue staining revealed mucus-containing goblet cells and a visible
mucus disposition in the lumen of only the VL-organoid (light blue)
(
Figure
3
A, Alcian
blue). These findings align with previously published studies
28
and confirm the successful differentiation from
CL to VL and limited diffusion of cellular components. Overall, these
data indicate that the adapted method for SIOs is applicable for MALDI-MSI
analysis and is suitable for additional histochemical stainings. Moreover,
MALDI-MSI enables us to reveal and explore previously undetected metabolic
differences between and within various SIO phenotypes in a spatial
manner.
Figure 3
Characterization of human SIOs using MALDI-MSI and (immuno)histochemical
staining. (A) Characterization of crypt-like and villus-like human
SIOs using MALDI-MSI different histological stainings. Brightfield
images representing different phenotypes of human SIOs, including
CL and VL organoids (scale bar: 500 μm). MALDI-MSI measurements
were performed in negative ion mode, where several lipid species were
visualized in both CL and VL SIO: (red) PE 36:2 [M – H]
−
(
m
/
z
742.5), (green)
PI 38:4 [M – H]
−
(
m
/
z
885.5) and (blue) PI 36:1 [M – H]
−
(
m
/
z
863.6). Representative stainings
for organoid morphology (H&E) and intestinal differentiation markers
in CL- and VL-cultured SIO. Alkaline phosphatase staining of the brush
border of enterocytes (blue) and Alcian blue-stained goblet cells
or mucus (light blue). (B) MALDI-IHC of CL organoids using a PC-MT
of PanCK. A consecutive H&E staining was performed on the same
sample after measurement. A conservative IHC staining of PanCK (brown)
was performed on a consecutive organoid section to validate the MALDI-IHC
results (scale bar: 500 μm).
MALDI-MSI is generally applied in an untargeted
manner. Recent
developments within the field of MSI demonstrated a novel technique
combining untargeted molecular profiling of MALDI-MSI with targeted
IHC (MALDI-IHC).
30
,
32
Here, antibodies are labeled
with photocleavable mass tags (PC-MTs) that can be detected with MALDI-MSI.
MALDI-IHC is especially interesting for various organoid model systems
because of the combination of MSI and conventional microscopy on a
single organoid section. Here, we investigated the application of
this novel technique to SIOs at a single-cell level (10 × 10
μm). CL organoids were stained with a PanCK antibody labeled
with a PC-MT (
m
/
z
1288.8) that can
be targeted with MALDI-MSI (
Figure
3
B). PanCK antibodies are a cocktail of several antibodies
that can target a broad spectrum of keratins and detect different
epithelial cell types (independent of the origin of the tissue/cell).
33
PanCK expression was detectable in CL organoids
and colocalized with the single epithelial cell lining of the organoid
by H&E staining. A conventional IHC staining of PanCK on a consecutive
organoid section validated our findings of PanCK expression by MALDI-IHC.
These findings demonstrate that multimodel MALDI-IHC can be applied
for organoid-based studies and complements untargeted MALDI-MSI. Additionally,
the sample preparation protocol developed in this study does not interfere
with this method. However, further research is required before multiplex
MALDI-IHC can be performed with multiple cell-specific targets. The
current protocol includes tissue fixation with formalin, which requires
antigen retrieval by heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER). However,
HIER does not always result in an optimal epitope recovery and risks
a loss of organoid sections. Therefore, an additional coating of ITO
slides with poly-
l
-lysine is suggested to improve the adhesion
of organoid sections, or further optimization of the fresh-frozen
MALDI-IHC protocol could potentially allow the formalin fixation step
to be omitted.
Conclusions
In this study, we introduce an enhanced
protocol for the isolation
and embedding of human SIOs. The organoid yield was increased, and
the sample preparation time was shortened with the use of the CRS
protocol. M-1 embedding matrix was demonstrated to be a suitable embedding
material compatible with both MSI and immuno(histological) stainings,
where it showed reduced analyte delocalization, optimized histological
visualization of organoid morphology, and absence of nonspecific antibody
binding compared to existing gelatin-based embedding protocols. This
protocol showed compatibility with untargeted lipid MALDI-MSI analysis,
as well as other complementary analytical techniques such as IHC,
histochemical staining, and MALDI-IHC. Furthermore, the protocol allows
the detection of a broad range of glycerophospholipid species in both
positive and negative ion modes and reveals different lipid distributions
and heterogeneity among human SIOs. Differences in lipid expression
were visualized among CL and VL organoids, revealing metabolic differences
between the organoid phenotypes. This highlights the strength of using
MSI for studying lipid metabolism and phenotyping of organoid models,
including the increased capability to combine MSI with histological
staining for spatial correlation.