Proteins are the major molecular
building blocks of life, dictating the spatial and temporal occurrence
of most biological functions.
1
Their functional
properties are mainly determined by their native three-dimensional
structure, subcellular localization, and interactome. Post-translational
modifications (PTMs) play an important role in regulating all these
properties of proteins and thus represent molecular switches for coordinating,
diversifying, and regulating cellular function.
2
Moreover, the majority of protein-based biopharmaceuticals
approved or in clinical trials bear some form of PTMs in order to
enhance their efficacy for therapeutic applications.
3
Despite the impressive recent advances in biochemistry
and structural biology, the development of sensitive methods to detect
PTMs, generate site-specifically modified proteins, and decipher the
PTM code of proteins still lags behind.
The standard methods
currently available for the detection of PTMs
are mass spectrometry (MS), and enzyme-linked antibody-based assays,
4
,
5
while immunoprecipitation coupled to MS (IP/MS) has also been increasingly
used to detect and quantify low abundant protein species. Recently,
great progress has been made toward developing and improving MS methods
and immunoassays to map, detect, and quantify modified proteins in
biological samples. For instance, proximity extension assays
6
and single molecule array (Simoa)
7
have shown high sensitivity for detecting PTMs. One of
the major drawbacks of these immunoassays is that they are based on
antibodies that are developed against single PTMs. Single-molecule
techniques such as electron tunneling have also achieved the detection
of single PTM on peptides (i.e., phosphorylation) with high sensitivity.
5
,
8
,
9
However, the development and optimization
of these methods did not account for the presence of multiple and/or
neighboring PTMs.
5
One example is demonstrated
in our recent work, which shows that neighboring PTMs interfere with
the detection of phosphorylated α-synuclein at S129 by most
pS129 antibodies.
10
Therefore, a method
to accurately identify protein PTMs is essential as increasing evidence
suggests the PTM code is combinatorial in nature and involves complex
interplay and cross-talk among PTMs.
11
,
12
PTMs
have been implicated in a wide variety of diseases, such as
characterizing the changes in protein PTM types and levels is highly
relevant for early diagnosis and monitoring the progression of diseases,
as well as for evaluating the efficacy of emerging therapies.
4
,
13
For example, several neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) are caused by the
accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins in the brain regions
that are affected by the disease (e.g., amyloid-β in amyloid
plaques, Tau in neurofibrillary tangles, and α-synuclein in
Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites). One shared characteristic among these
proteins is that their aggregated forms are heavily modified. PTMs
have emerged as key signatures of disease pathologies and are commonly
used as the primary (bio)markers of disease progression and pathology
formation, spreading and clearance in response to therapies.
14
,
15
Nanopore sensing is an approach based on ionic current readout
that can detect a single molecule as it is passing through a nanometer
scale pore.
16
Such pores are either biological
assemblies of proteins embedded in a lipid membrane or are fabricated
by a solid-state material.
17
When a molecule
of interest passes through such a pore, the electric current signal
is modulated and exquisitely sensitive to the molecule of interest
and thus can provide information about its size, mass, charge, composition,
structure and conformation in real-time.
18
,
19
Nanopore sensing has achieved sequencing of ultralong DNA,
20
,
21
and this success has inspired its application for peptide and protein
analyses.
22
−
25
Compared with MS, nanopore sensing is faster, cheaper, free of ionization,
and has an ultrasensitive detection of biomolecules in solution at
the single-molecule level. These distinguishing features, in particular
its sensitivity, make nanopores perfectly suited for protein analysis
since there is no biochemical method available for protein amplification,
like polymerase chain reaction, that has been widely used for DNA
amplification. Recently, several groups have explored the potential
of using nanopore approaches to detect protein PTMs, including phosphorylation,
26
−
28
acetylation,
29
propionylation,
30
glycosylation,
31
,
32
and ubiquitination.
33
However, these studies focus on identifying
either different types of modifications or the same modification at
different positions but do not consider the simultaneous occurrence
of different types and combinations of PTM species that are of clear
clinical relevance. Moreover, the detection of low-abundance protein
PTMs from clinical samples is still poorly investigated.
Here,
we demonstrate that an engineered form of aerolysin, a founding
number of a major class of β-pore-forming toxins which has shown
an excellent sensing capability for DNA and peptide analysis,
34
−
37
can be used to detect peptides containing single or multiple types
of PTMs. As a model system, we used peptides derived from the C-terminal
domain of the presynaptic protein α-synuclein, the primary constituent
of the pathological hallmarks of PD (i.e., Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites).
This region is characterized by the clustering of different types
of PTMs (e.g., phosphorylation, nitration and oxidation) that are
associated with pathology formation and disease progression in PD
and other neurodegenerative diseases.
38
Recent studies also suggest that specific α-synuclein PTMs
(i.e., pS129) are elevated in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) of PD
patients and could be developed into diagnostic biomarkers for PD
and potentially for other neurodegenerative diseases.
39
,
40
We observe that phosphorylation, nitration, and oxidation
significantly
modulate the current amplitude and dwell time of the signals in comparison
with the wild-type (wt) α-synuclein. Additionally, we show that
the α-synuclein peptides bearing multiple PTMs and different
PTMs combinations induce characteristic ionic current signatures,
which provides an opportunity to investigate PTMs crosstalk and monitor
the PTMs dynamics in the future. A deep learning approach was specifically
developed to process the signals, providing an automatic and fast
way to classify the current readouts associated with each PTM combination.
We also demonstrate the ability of aerolysin pores to detect unmodified
α-synuclein peptides when mixed with red blood cells (RBCs)
at picomolar concentration as well as the possibility of using cathepsin
D to generate the specific C-terminal peptides that bear most PTMs,
providing promising ground for actual clinical applications. In summary,
our work presents a single-molecule approach able to detect clinically
relevant low-abundance α-synuclein PTMs. Compared to other analytical
methods like MS and ELISA,
41
,
42
this nanopore-based
approach offers detection at single-molecule resolution and provides
promising ground to decipher PTMs patterns relevant for disease diagnostics.
Results and Discussion
Characterization of the C-Terminal Region of α-Synuclein
with a Nanopore
The ability of aerolysin to detect PTMs was
examined by means of single-channel recording experiments, as shown
in
Figure
1
a. A lipid
membrane separates the chamber into two compartments,
cis
and
trans
, and holds an aerolysin pore that connects
them. An engineered variant of aerolysin is used here, namely K238A,
where lysine residues at position 238 are substituted by alanine residues,
providing a significantly enhanced resolution for biomolecular sensing
compared to wt aerolysin.
43
As mentioned
above, we focused on α-synuclein as a model system because of
the strong links between its PTM profile and the brain pathology of
several neurodegenerative diseases, most notably in PD.
38
,
44
Figure 1
Characterization
of wild-type α-synuclein C-terminal peptides.
(a) Illustration of the single-channel recording setup composed of
two chambers separated by a lipid membrane that is formed across an
orifice; the chambers are named
cis
and
trans
. Voltage is applied across the pore using two Ag/AgCl electrodes.
(b) The structure of α-synuclein in full-length (PDB:
1xq8
), including the
amphipathic N-terminus (yellow), nonamyloid-component (NAC) domain
(green), and the disordered C-terminal fragment (blue). Phosphorylation
(red circle), nitration (blue circle), and oxidation (green circle)
of residues 124–140 are highlighted. Nanopore single channel
recording of wt α-syn
124–140
peptide in 1.0
M KCl (c) and in 1.0 M KCl, 8.0 M urea (d) solutions, respectively,
both buffered with 10 mM Tris, and 1.0 mM EDTA at pH 7.4. Left panels
of (c) and (d) report raw current traces, middle panels typical events,
while the right panels show scatter plots,
I
/
I
0
percentage, and dwell time histograms. All
data were obtained by applying a voltage of +100 mV.
The C-terminal domain of α-synuclein, encompassing
the residues
124–140 (α-syn
124–140
) (
Figure
1
b) harbors several PTMs that
are found in pathological α-synuclein aggregates in the brain
of patients with PD and other neurodegenerative diseases.
44
Many of these PTMs, including phosphorylation
and nitration, have emerged as reliable markers of α-synuclein
pathology formation in human brains and animal models of PD and related
synucleinopathies.
38
The C-terminal domain
of α-synuclein is rich in proline residues, it is highly negatively
charged and does not adopt a stable secondary structure in the monomeric
state of the protein,
45
which in this context
is particularly convenient as these peptides can be easily driven
to translocate through the nanopore by the potential applied across
the lipid membrane. All peptides were prepared using Fmoc-based solid-phase
peptide synthesis and purified as previously reported
46
−
48
(see
Methods
).
α-Syn
124–140
was added into the
cis
compartment and when a positive
voltage was applied
to the
trans
compartment, clear and reproducible
blockades of ionic current were obtained (
Figure
1
c,d). For wt α-syn
124–140
, a peculiar and well-recognizable 2-level blockade event was observed
and the signal often contained a higher residual current at the last
fraction (
Figure
1
c,
middle). As a result, two populations were observed (
Figure
1
c, right): one exhibited a
relative current percentage (
I
/
I
0
, see
Methods
) of 9.0 ±
2.0, while the other 17.1 ± 2.0 (named hereafter
PI
and
PII
, respectively). These values correspond
to the mean and standard deviation derived from a Gaussian fit of
the relative current histogram.
To gain
further insights into this peculiar two-level signal, we
considered the structure of this α-synuclein fragment. Based
on previous studies,
49
there is a highly
hydrophobic segment between residues 125–129 that can produce
a structurally compact cluster likely responsible for the initial
lower residual current. To test this hypothesis, we reasoned that
destabilizing this conformation by the addition of urea could produce
signals expected for a more extended peptide.
49
We thus used 8.0 M urea (along with 1.0 M KCl, 10 mM Tris, 1.0 mM
EDTA, and pH 7.4) to induce complete unfolding of the peptide, while
aerolysin remained folded and functional (
Supplementary Figure S1
). Under these conditions, the open pore current was
lower (25 ± 1.8 pA at +100 mV) compared to the same salt concentration
without urea (72 ± 1.5 pA at +100 mV). This is because the additional
urea significantly decreased the mobility of the ions.
50
,
51
However, in these conditions, wt α-syn
124–140
translocated with a simple one-level signal as evidenced by one
population in the scatter plot and the
I
/
I
0
histograms (
Figure
1
d). These one-level current signals suggest
that the addition of urea results in a more extended conformation
of the polypeptide chain, which facilitates its translocation through
the pore. In addition, due to the decrease of ionic mobility, the
dwell time became much longer, 8.6 ± 0.24 ms, approximately 4
times longer than the condition without urea. These results demonstrate
that the conformation of largely disordered peptides such as those
obtained from α-synuclein can be monitored at the single-molecule
level using a nanopore.
Deep Learning-Assisted Detection of Different PTMs and Their
Combinations
Next, we assessed the feasibility of using nanopores
for detecting PTMs of α-syn
124–140
peptide.
We investigated different types of modifications occurring at the
same amino acid (i.e., phosphorylation and nitration of Y125, pY125
and nY125), or the same type of PTM located at different positions
(i.e., pS129 and pY125, nY125 and nY136). Moreover, we considered
peptides bearing multiple PTMs of the same type (i.e., pY125pS129
and nY125nY133nY136) and of different types (i.e., nY125pS129).
As shown in
Figure
2
a, the current signatures of the different PTM combinations appeared
to all have distinct current characteristics. Compared to the unmodified
peptide, the pY125 and nY125 α-syn
124–140
peptide
presented only one level and their relative current were lower than
the wt peptide (
Supplementary Figure S2
). This decrease in the relative current value is consistent with
a deeper blockade induced by the additional volume due to the presence
of the PTMs. Moreover, the dwell time varied significantly with different
types of PTMs, the fitted values being 2.58 ± 0.4 ms for wt,
0.55 ± 0.08 ms for pY125, and 4.51 ± 0.5 ms for nY125, indicating
that phosphorylation speeds up the translocation process, while nitration
significantly slows it down. The faster translocation of pY125 could
be induced by the additional negatively charged phosphate group. In
addition, we investigated the effect of oxidation of methionine at
position 127 of α-syn
124–140
(oM127,
Supplementary Figure S3
). Similar to pY125 and
nY125, oM127 also showed only one current level.
Figure 2
Discrimination of α-synuclein
peptide PTMs by deep learning.
(a) Typical ionic current signals of different PTM types and their
spatial combinations. The scale shown in the left top panel applies
to all of the events. (b) Deep learning approach to signal processing:
an LSTM recurrent neural network was used to read the events, followed
by an MLP to predict the peptides. (c) The normalized confusion matrix
over the predictions shown as percentage of wt, pY125, and nY125 peptides
classification using a deep learning approach. (d) Assignment percentage
of different mixture samples of wt and pY125 at a concentration ratio
of 1:1 (left), 1:3 (middle), and 3:2 (right). The theoretical accuracy
is shown by the white columns while the predicted accuracy is represented
by blue columns. (e) Selection percentage versus averaged accuracy
obtained from deep learning approach of peptides, including wt, pY125,
nY125, pS129, pY125pS129, nY125nY133nY136, and nY125pS129. (f) The
normalized confusion matrix over the predictions shown as percentage
of wt, pY125, nY125, pS129, pY125pS129, nY125nY133nY136, and nY125pS129
classification. Columns represent actual peptides from the test set,
while rows represent the peptides that the deep learning algorithm
assigned them to. All data were obtained using 1.0 M KCl, 10 mM Tris,
and 1.0 mM EDTA buffer at pH 7.4 by applying a voltage of +100 mV.
When the same PTM occurs at different positions
in the peptide
sequence, the ionic current and dwell time were modulated differently.
For example, the dwell time of pS129 (3.62 ± 0.2 ms) is 6.5 times
longer than that of pY125 (0.55 ± 0.08 ms). We hypothesize that
phosphorylation at Y125 (pY125) disrupts the hydrophobic cluster of
α-syn
124–140
,
49
all amino acids become more easily exposed and translocate in a
linear fashion. In this case, the additional phosphate group of pY125
contributes to faster translocation under the applied voltages. Similar
results were obtained when we compared nY125 and nY136 α-syn
124–140
(
Supplementary Figures S2b and S4b
). Unlike nY125, which only showed one population, the
relative current of nY136 was less pronounced compared to that of
wt and showed two populations like wt α-syn
124–140
. This suggests that disrupting the local structure facilitates the
detection of PTMs in proteins by the aerolysin pore. As reported recently,
this could be also achieved by using chemical denaturants such as
urea or guanidinium chloride.
52
To
explore the possibility of using the nanopore for the detection
of multiple PTMs occurring simultaneously on the same peptide, we
measured the ionic current response of double-phosphorylated α-syn
124–140
, pY125pS129, and triple nitrated α-syn
124–140
, nY125nY133nY136 (
Supplementary Figure S4c,d
). Here, the nanopore results showed that compared
to the unmodified peptide (wt) and the singly phosphorylated peptides
(i.e., pY125 and pS129), the translocation speed of pY125pS129 (0.45
± 0.02 ms) was even faster, likely due to its increased negative
charge. While the dwell time of nY125nY133nY136 was around 2-fold
longer (5.18 ± 0.23 ms) compared to wt and nY136, and slightly
longer than nY125: its relative current was the lowest among all peptides
(7.2 ± 1.0) since the three modifications contribute to increasing
the overall volume of the peptide and therefore induce a deeper blockade
of ionic current. In the case of the peptides containing two types
of PTMs at different positions, i.e., nitration at Y125 and phosphorylation
at S129 (nY125pS129,
Supplementary Figure S4e
), only one population was observed. The relative current of nY125pS129
was between the values of the single modifications nY125 and pS129,
as observed also for the width of the relative current distribution.
The dwell time of nY125pS129 was slightly longer than that of pS129,
but identical with nY125. For all of these peptides, the dwell time
decreases as the voltage increases, indicating that the collected
signals are indeed induced by peptides translocating through the nanopore.
Altogether, these observations demonstrate that the engineered K238A
aerolysin can capture the diversity of PTMs.
To classify these
PTMs in a more precise, unbiased, and automatic
way that would allow a translation to clinical applications in the
future, we developed a tailored deep learning approach for processing
the nanopore current readouts. A long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent
neural network was integrated to read the local extrema of events
followed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to classify the peptides
(
Figure
2
b), a pipeline
which is similar to our previous analysis of informational polymers
53
(see details in
Methods
). We first detected the events with a cutoff threshold at 3σ
from the open pore current and then computed statistical features
(i.e., mean residual current, standard deviation, and dwell time)
and extracted the local extrema of the events (
Supplementary Figure S5
and
Methods
). For each single peptide, we randomly used 75% of the recorded
data to feed the deep learning algorithm and train the model; the
remaining 25% was used as validation set to compute the accuracy of
the model for each single peptide. The events are filtered using a
threshold on the predictions confidence of the model which is translated
into a selection percentage.
As shown in
Figure
2
c, this approach allows for differentiating
wt α-syn
124–140
from peptides that contain
different PTMs at the same position Y125
(i.e., pY125 and nY125) with an accuracy of 94% at a 50% selection
percentage. Control experiments with a mixture of wt and pY125 at
different concentration ratios were performed to further test the
deep learning model (
Figure
2
d). First, a mixture of an equimolar ratio (1:1) was measured
in nanopore experiments and the percentage of assignment of wt and
pY125 was 52.8 ± 3.5% and 43.2 ± 3.1%, respectively. This
is in line with the theoretical predictions. When the ratio of wt:pY125
was changed to 1:3, the percentage of wt assignment decreased to 19.0
± 0.3% while pY125 increased to 78.2 ± 0.7%. Finally, a
mixture ratio of 3:2 (wt:pY125) was tested. As shown in
Figure
2
d, the assignments of wt and
pY125 were as expected 61.5 ± 0.1% and 35.0 ± 0.2%, respectively.
Therefore, the expectation is that any sequence in the library of
peptides (wt, pY125, or nY125) can be identified directly with a probability
of 94%. Furthermore, mixture experiments of wt and pS129 were performed
(
Supplementary Figure S6
), for which the
deep learning model could predict the different mixture ratios with
a probability of 96%.
Data from wt and the 7 tested α-syn
124–140
PTM variants (i.e., pY125, nY125, pS129, nY136,
pY125pS129, nY125nY133nY136,
and nY125pS129) have been used as a training set for the same deep
learning model, with a resulting accuracy of 78.2% using a selection
percentage of 25% (i.e., accuracy dependence on selection percentage
as shown in
Figure
2
e). If the event is too noisy or does not contain enough information
as in the case of short events, the prediction confidence would be
lower. The selection percentage allows for a trade-off between accuracy
and filtering without requiring heavy filtering during the preprocessing
of the events. As illustrated in
Figure
2
f, 13% of pY125 was confused with pY25pS129,
because the signals of both pY125 and pY25pS129 showed very short
dwell times. This could be further improved if higher-bandwidth instruments
have been employed. Additionally, 6% of nY125 was confused with nY125nY133nY136,
while the other 16% of this peptide was confused with nY125pS129,
10% of nY136 was confused with pS129 and the other 9% was confused
with wt. We think this prediction confusion was caused by the similar
dwell times between these modified peptides. Nonetheless, the deep
learning approach we developed here provides high reading accuracy
for all of the tested PTMs peptides, particularly for pS129 which
is one of the most relevant biomarkers for synucleinopathies. This
is encouraging also because a similar deep learning model can be trained
for other systems, thus finding general applicability for signal
processing in nanopore sensing experiments.
Detection of α-Synuclein Peptides at Low Abundance Concentration
To date, most nanopore sensing applications are performed using
purified peptides or protein samples (as done hereinabove). There
is however the need to develop methodologies whereby detection can
be performed on biological samples.
54
Nevertheless,
even though some nanopores have been used for the detection of biomolecules
in biological fluids samples (e.g., plasma,
55
,
56
serum,
54
,
57
−
61
sweat,
62
urine,
62
and saliva
62
), the
task of measuring biomarker peptides is often challenging due to the
intrinsic low sensitivity and selectivity of the techniques applied
to bodily fluids.
We previously showed that aerolysin pores
possess high sensitivity for biomolecular sensing, especially its
engineered variants.
43
,
63
Therefore, we explored if K238A
aerolysin was able to detect α-synuclein peptides in clinically
relevant conditions, red blood cells (RBCs) devoid of hemoglobin (Hb)
proteins. We first determined the dilution necessary to ensure a stable
baseline of the ionic current through serial dilutions of Hb-depleted
RBC samples. In the literature, no particular instabilities of the
lipid bilayer were observed when testing RBCs except when dilutions
were lower than 1:50.
62
Based on these
previous reports, we scanned a range of dilutions up to 1:100 (
Figure
3
a) in our setting
and observed that after the addition of 3 μL of Hb-depleted
RBCs extracts into the
cis
chamber, no obvious effects
were detected for the membrane stability. Interestingly, during the
experiments with Hb-depleted RBCs, we could continually collect data
for up to 3 h, indicating that the aerolysin pore remained invariantly
intact likely due to the ultrastability provided by its double β-barrel
structure.
35
Moreover, when the concentration
of Hb-depleted RBCs samples increased in the chamber, occasional signals
were also observed (
Supplementary Figure S7
). Notably, all raw current traces shown in
Figure
3
were collected 30 min after samples were
added.
Figure 3
Detection of α-synuclein peptides at low abundance concentration.
(a) Raw current traces after addition of serial dilutions of Hb-depleted
RBC samples. For 1:1 condition, 3 μL of red blood cell lysates
devoid of hemoglobin were added to the 150 μL nanopore chamber
(the total protein content is 0.4–0.5 μg/μL). (b)
Raw current traces of Hb-depleted RBCs sample in the presence of 6
μM wt α-syn
124–140
peptides. The RBCs
used here is 1:10 dilution. (c) Raw current traces showing signals
of α-syn
124–140
in symmetric salt (top, 1.0
M KCl) and in a gradient salt concentration (bottom, 0.15 M/3.0 M
(
cis
/
trans
) KCl). (d) The correlation
between signal frequency
f
sig
and the
concentration of wt α-syn
124–140
in gradient
salt conditions ranging from 100 pM to 200 nM peptide in the
cis
chamber under +100 mV applied voltage. The error bars
represent standard deviations from at least three independent experiments
under the same conditions.
Next, we sought to quantify the presence of α-synuclein
wt
peptide within the Hb-depleted RBCs, with the aim of mimicking the
real complexity of pathological conditions within a clinical setting.
Based on the previous tests, dilutions of 1:10 were chosen as the
background for Hb-depleted RBCs extracts. As illustrated in
Figure
3
b, after the addition
of wt α-syn
124–140
, typical two-level signals
were recorded.
While these results represent the potential of
aerolysin pores
to detect C-terminal α-synuclein peptide, another prerequisite
toward the development of aerolysin pores into an efficient single-molecule
proteomic device for biomarker detection is the ability to detect
molecules in low abundance, as often found in clinical samples. In
previous studies, the frequency of signals has been used to quantify
the detected molecule. Therefore, we used the equation
f
sig
=
k
on
[PTMs]
0
to explore the theoretical detection limit of aerolysin nanopores
for sensing α-synuclein peptides. As illustrated in
Supplementary Figure S8
, we verified that the
frequency of blockade events,
f
sig
, was
proportional to the concentration of α-synuclein ranging from
120 nM to 24 μM, when +100 mV were applied using a symmetric
buffer of 1.0 M KCl. The physiological concentration of α-synuclein
in RBCs is however much lower than these tested conditions, namely
26.2 ± 3.0 μg/mL,
64
,
65
which corresponds to
35 nM if 3 μL of the original sample was added into the nanopore
system. Therefore, to enhance the detection limit of our setting,
we measured peptides in a gradient of salt concentration, which was
shown to be an efficient way to increase the capture rate for ssDNA.
56
,
66
An asymmetrical KCl buffer solution consisting of 0.15 M in the
cis
chamber and 3.0 M in the
trans
was
thus used (
Figure
3
c), which enabled the detection of wt α-synuclein peptides
at far lower concentrations (i.e., ∼100 pM,
Figure
3
d) than when using canonical
symmetric buffer conditions.
Altogether, these results demonstrate
that K238A aerolysin nanopores
can detect C-terminal peptides of α-synuclein at ∼nM
concentration (factoring in the dilution conditions), a condition
which is overlapping with the concentration at which they are found
in a RBC clinical sample. Considering that an even lower detection
limit could be achieved by applying higher voltages, minimizing the
volume of the chambers, or optimizing the pore variants, the possibility
of developing an effective nanopore-based tool for the diagnosis of
synucleinopathies appears within reach.
Detection of α-Synuclein Peptides in Complex Mixtures
Next, we sought to determine if the presence of multiple fragments,
produced for instance by proteolytic cleavage of α-synuclein,
could influence the nanopore detection of C-terminal peptides bearing
the desired PTMs. This aims at mimicking and describing the actual
α-synuclein mixtures that one could find in an actual clinical
sample. For this purpose, we choose to work with cathepsin D (CtsD)
protease as previous studies showed that CtsD-mediated digestion of
α-synuclein results in the generation of a C-terminal fragment
spanning residues 125–140 (α-syn
125–140
), in addition to four other α-synuclein fragments of various
length
67
,
68
(
Figure
4
a). The C-terminal fragment contains the great majority
of known disease-associated PTM sites (p/nY125, pS129, nY133, nY136),
including all the ones we investigate above for α-syn
124–140
. To the best of our knowledge, CtsD is the only enzyme that cleaves
α-synuclein and results in the generation of a peptide fragment
that contains all the most relevant PTM sites, thus making it the
ideal choice for future studies to detect α-synuclein C-terminal
peptides bearing single or multiple PTMs. Other enzymes which cleave
within the C-terminal domain, e.g., Glu-C, give rise to much shorter
peptides, thus precluding the detection of single peptides containing
multiple PTMs.
44
Figure 4
Detection of C-terminal
peptides of α-synuclein after CtsD
digestion. (a) Possible peptide fragments from CtsD digestion based
on previous studies
66
and MS characterization
of CtsD digestion of full-length α-synuclein. (b) Raw current
trace from nanopore measurement of CtsD-digested samples. (c) Deep
learning result from 5 independent experiments aimed at classifying
α-syn
125–140
from the mixture sample.
We incubated CtsD with full-length α-synuclein
(see details
in
Methods
) and detected the resulting products
by nanopore experiments afterward. In parallel, the same sample was
characterized by MS and, as shown in
Figure
4
a, CtsD digestion produced three main peptide
fragments, α-syn
5–38,
α-syn
95–124
, and α-syn
125–140
. After the CtsD-digested
α-synuclein sample was added into the nanopore system, diverse
current signals were obtained (
Figure
4
b). Under these conditions, the deep learning model
was able to identify the C-terminal peptides α-syn
125–140
with an average accuracy of 81.4 ± 1.1% from five independent
experiments (
Figure
4
c), implying that the other proteolytic fragments, while having an
effect of the current readout do not compromise the ability to detect
the α-syn
125–140
fragment. It should be noted
that there is one amino acid difference between peptides used to train
the deep learning model and this α-syn
125–140
fragment; a difference which however does not seem to affect significantly
the accuracy of predictions, likely because Ala124 does not contribute
in a significant way to modulate the current signal during translocation,
while not holding any PTM. Moreover, as α-syn
5–38
is positively charged, we do not expect it to be captured by the
nanopore when using +100 mV voltage. Therefore, the only possible
fragment that may interfere with the measurement is α-syn
95–124
since it is negatively charged. However, it should
be noted that the length of α-syn
95–124
is
two times longer than α-syn
125–140
which may
lead to a low capture rate in the conditions used here. As shown for
DNA, the capture of long ssDNA is dramatically reduced in the aerolysin
nanopore.
69
Conclusions
In this work, we have shown that an engineered
aerolysin nanopore
can detect and distinguish peptides carrying different types and numbers
of PTMs occurring at different residues. In addition, the measurements
can capture subtle structural features that are challenging to be
characterized by other biophysical methods without fluorescently labeling
or modifying the peptides/proteins. Using a deep learning model for
signal processing, all investigated PTMs could be automatically identified
in a supervised context, which means that this approach can be scaled
up to identify more PTMs or scaled down to fit a specific application.
Importantly, this nanopore approach can reach a detection limit as
low as 100 picomolar concentration and is amenable for high-throughput
applications, which are challenging for other techniques such as MS.
Finally, one major advantage of this nanopore-based approach is that
it enables simultaneous detection of several protein PTMs which is
difficult to achieve using immunoassay/antibody-based methods. This
is because the presence of multiple PTMs alters the biochemical properties
of the antibody-targeting epitopes.
Altogether, our findings
advance the development of biological
nanopores into efficient single-molecule proteomic devices and diagnostic
tools. We envision that this could be achieved by detecting the circulating
peptides directly, or by isolating target proteins from various biological
fluids using specific antibodies
70
and
then digesting them into smaller peptides and subsequently detecting
them through a nanopore as reported in the recent studies.
67
,
71
In the future, clinical samples could be treated directly with the
specific protease, rather than extracting the target proteins, and
subsequently detected and classified using nanopores. Several very
recent studies have shown that nanopore sensors can be used identify
different types of proteins by assessing characteristic blockage event
features linked to peptide fragments produced by digestion of the
proteins with proteases.
72
,
73
Such nanopore-based
molecular diagnosis platform would hold also promise to detect multiple
biomarkers simultaneously, broadly extending the potential field of
application, for instance for the detection of biomarker signatures
for cancer diagnosis.
74
The ability
of the aerolysin pore to detect and distinguish between
long peptides bearing multiple PTMs also provides a more precise remapping
of PTMs in proteins at the single-molecule level, which remains a
challenge for MS and other methods. In conclusion, the nanopore-based
technology presented here, besides the natural advantages of being
fast, cheap, label-free, and high-throughput, provides the possibility
of being developed into a portable diagnostic device with medical
and commercial potential.
Methods
Synthesis of C-Terminal α-Synuclein Peptides and Their
PTMs
The majority of peptides used in nanopore experiments
were produced as described in previous works.
44
−
46
A few peptides
(oM127 and wt shown in
Supplementary Figure S2
) were provided by GenicBio Limited. All peptides were characterized
by Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) as previously
described.
70
Their purity was also assessed
by UPLC analysis, on a Waters Acquity H-Class system using a C18 column
(with UV detection at 214 nm and run time of 4 min (gradient 10% to
90% acetonitrile) with 0.6 mL/min flow rate.
RBCs were prepared
similarly as previously described.
75
Briefly,
RBCs were lysed and further treated using the Hemovoid kit (Biotech
Support Group), aiming to remove hemoglobin (the most abundant protein
in RBCs) and to enrich low-abundance proteins such as α-synuclein.
Importantly, all biological fluids used in this study are derived
from healthy controls.
CtsD digestion experiments were performed
in a total volume of
100 μL. Specifically, 2 μL of 500 μM CtsD (Sigma-Aldrich
Chemie GmbH, Buchs, SG Switzerland), 3 μL of 100 μM full-length
α-synuclein and 95 μL of buffer (40 mM sodium acetate,
50 mM NaCl and 5 mM DTT, pH 5) incubated at 37 °C for 20 h at
300 rpm in a ThermoMixer C.
Aerolysin Productions
The recombinant K238A aerolysin
proteins were generated from the aerolysin gene in the pET22b vector
with a C-terminal hexa-histidine tag as described in our previous
work,
43
,
53
and then expressed and purified from BL21
DE3 pLys
E. coli
cells. Cells
were grown to an optical density of 0.6–0.7 in Luria–Bertani
(LB) media. Protein expression was induced by the addition of 1 mM
isopropyl β-
d
-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and subsequent
growth overnight at 20 °C. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis
buffer (20 mM Sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl) mixed with cOmplete
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and then lysed by sonication.
The resulting suspensions were centrifuged (12.000 rpm for 35 min
at 4 °C), and the supernatants were purified through a HisTrap
HP column (GE Healthcare) previously equilibrated with lysis buffer.
The protein was eluted with a gradient over 40 column volumes of elution
buffer (20 mM Sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 500 mM Imidazole),
and buffer was exchanged into a final buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4,
500 mM NaCl) using a HiPrep Desalting column (GE Healthcare). The
purified protein was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at
−20 °C.
Single-Channel Recording Experiments
Phospholipids
of 1,2-diphytanoyl-
sn
-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPhPC)
powder (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, USA) were dissolved in octane
(Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Buchs, Switzerland) for a final concentration
of 1.0 mg per 100 μL. Purified protein was diluted to the concentration
of 0.2 μg/mL and then incubated with Trypsin-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich
Chemie GmbH, Buchs, SG Switzerland) for 2 h under 4 °C temperature.
The solution was finally centrifuged to remove trypsin.
Nanopore
single-channel recording experiments were performed on Orbit Mini
equipment (Nanion, Munich, Germany) and an Axopatch 200B Amplifier
system (Molecular Devices, San Jose, USA). In the Orbit Mini setup,
DPhPC membranes were formed across a MECA 4 recording chip that contains
a 2 × 2 array of cylindrical 50 μm diameter in a highly
inert polymer. Each of the four cavities contains an individual integrated
Ag/AgCl-microelectrode and sustains one DPhPC bilayer. If not indicated
otherwise, the measurement chamber temperature was set to 20 °C.
Data was collected at 10 kHz sampling rate with a 5 kHz low-pass filter.
Ionic strength gradient experiments were carried out as follows.
Teflon films with 50 μm apertures were mounted in Teflon chambers
using high-vacuum grease (Dow Corning Corporation, Midland, MI, USA).
The films separated two compartments (
cis
/
trans
) only connected through the Teflon film aperture with
one Ag/AgCl electrode in each compartment. Apertures were pretreated
with 1 μL of 2% (v/v) hexadecane in hexane on both sides using
a standard pipet, and the chamber was mounted in the recording setup.
DPhPC bilayers were formed by folding as described previously.
76
,
77
Briefly, electrolyte solution was added to both sides taking care
that the level stayed below the aperture, and lipids (10 mg/mL in
pentane) were added onto the electrolyte surface in both compartments.
After the pentane evaporated, the electrolyte level was raised above
the aperture, and a lipid bilayer was formed. The quality of the lipid
bilayer was monitored through its capacitance, and its stability was
verified through the application of 150 mV over the course of at least
5 min. After peptide addition, the
cis
chamber was
carefully mixed by pipetting up and down. Currents were sampled at
200 kHz and low-pass filtered at 100 kHz with an Axopatch 200B (Molecular
Devices, LLC., San Jose, CA, USA).
Peptides (lyophilized powder)
were prediluted in 10 mM Tris and
1.0 mM EDTA solution (pH 7.4) to a stock concentration of 500 μM
and added to the
cis
side of the chamber in 1.0 M
KCl solution buffered with 10 mM Tris and 1.0 mM EDTA (pH 7.4) to
the final concentration indicated in the figure caption. All experiments
shown here were repeated with at least 4 different pores.
Signals Processing and Classifications Using Deep Learning
The signal processing was done in the same way as previously reported.
53
The open pore current distribution is measured
by fitting a Gaussian function on the peak distribution of the current
with the highest mean current. The events are extracted using a current
threshold at 3σ from the open pore current distribution. The
relative current percentage (
I
/
I
0
) is computed from the mean open pore current (
I
0
) and the mean residual current (
I
). The dwell time, average relative current, relative standard deviation
of the current
(σ
0
is the value of the
open pore current standard deviation and σ is the residual current
standard deviation) and local extrema are computed. The events are
selected on the basis of the dwell time (0.2 to 100.0 ms) and the
average relative current (0 to 40%) discarding the events that are
too short, too long, or that do not block the current sufficiently.
The machine learning pipeline is composed of two steps. The first
one is the classification of every event, and the second is the assessment
of the quality of the prediction of the classifier. The neural network
architecture for both the classification and the assessment is a long,
short-term memory (LSTM) neural network followed by a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) using the position in time and relative current of the local
extrema for each event as input features. The features are rescaled
by a fixed factor to decrease the training time. The classifier is
composed of an LSTM with state size 128 without any activation function
followed by 6 fully connected hidden layers of size 256 with rectified
linear unit (ReLU) as activation functions and finally an output layer
of size 8 with softmax activation function. The assessment is done
with a scaled down version of the classifier with a LSTM with a state
of size 32, 3 fully connected hidden layers of size 64 with hyperbolic
tangent activation functions, and an output layer of size 1 with sigmoid
activation function. The neural networks for the classification and
assessment are trained together using a 3-parts loss function. The
first part is the full classification cross-entropy loss of the predictions
from the classifier and the peptides label. The second part is the
assessment of the cross-entropy loss between the predicted and actual
prediction validity from the classifier. The third part is the reinforcement
classification loss, which is the full classification cross-entropy
loss scaled by the assessment prediction.
The deep learning
classifier is benchmarked using cross-validation,
where the first (in time) 75% of the events of a measurement is used
for training and the last 25% for validation. In the case of the mixture
experiments, we use the holdout method as they are not present in
the training data set (or test/validation data sets). The data set
composed of nY125, nY125nY133nY136, nY125pS129, nY136, pS129, pY125,
pY125pS129, and wt contains 519,000 events. The data set for oM127
and wt contains 83,000 events. The mixture experiments (WT:pY125)
data set contains 88,999 events.