1
Introduction
HCC, the most prevalent type of primary liver cancer, continues to exhibit a substantial global incidence and fatality rate [
1
]. Due to considerable variability in expressivity and genetic diversity, systemic medications are the sole therapeutic options accessible to HCC patients. Sorafenib and Lenvatinib, the first-line therapy for HCC, are multikinase inhibitors that facilitate apoptosis and have been found to modestly extend patient life by approximately three months [
2
,
3
]. However, these inhibitors also have the potential to increase the vulnerability of tumors to recurrence due to their promotion of intracellular metabolic conversion. Despite the demonstrated efficacy of the immune checkpoint inhibitors atezolizumab and bevacizumab in enhancing overall survival, the occurrence of immune-related side events remains a notable concern [
4
].
HCC is commonly associated with disorders of glucose and lipid metabolism. To support their rapid proliferation, HCC cells undergo alteration in lipid uptake, storage, lipogenesis and lipolysis through the reprograming of lipogenic gene expression profiles [
[5]
,
[6]
,
[7]
,
[8]
,
[9]
,
[10]
]. Accumulated evidence indicates a strong association between lipid metabolism and ferroptosis [
11
]. The sensitization of ferroptosis can be achieved by decreasing the phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and increasing the buildup of lipids that include polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). This process is facilitated by the lipid peroxidation mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Fe
2+
catalysis [
12
]. In addition, regulation of acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member (ACSL4), lysophosphatidyl choline acyltransferase 3 (LPCAT3) and15-lipoxygenase (15-LOX) has been shown to accelerates oxidization of arachidonoyl (AA) and adrenoyl (AdA) phospholipids, leading to increased production of lipid peroxides (LPO) and activation of ferroptotic signaling [
[13]
,
[14]
,
[15]
]. Moreover, the inhibition of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) leads to the induction of ferroptosis through the reduction in monounsaturated fatty acids and augmentation of long-chain saturated ceramides [
16
]. Furthermore, the inhibition of PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling with CCI-779, a mTORC1 inhibitor, has been shown to promote ferroptosis and induce tumor regression by repressing SREBP1 activation and decreasing SCD1 expression [
17
]. Therefore, the aberrant lipid metabolism that sustains the viability of cancer cells is a promising target for HCC therapy [
18
]. Inhibition of system X
c
-
by Erastin or Sorafenib [
16
,
19
], elevation of the labile iron pool via the excessive activity of heme oxygenase 1 by BAY 11-7085 [
20
] or modulation of mitochondrion-generated ROS [
21
,
22
], result in GSH depletion, altered lipid metabolism, elevated lipid ROS and ferroptosis in liver cancer cells [
23
]. Despite promising preclinical evidence suggesting a favorable prognosis for HCC treatment [
24
], further investigation is required to fully understand the impact of ferroptosis induction and the underlying mechanisms involved in HCC.
The transcription factor SOX8, which belongs to the SRY-related HMG Box (SOX) family, was initially discovered as the sex determination gene and has been found to play a role in the fertility of adult mice [
25
]. Recent studies have revealed that SOX8 possesses a distinct capability to govern the development of the ear [
26
], as well as the differentiation of M cells and the activation of mucosal immune responses mediated by IgA [
27
]. In this study, we elucidate a previously unidentified role of SOX8 in the regulation of lipogenesis and ferroptosis. Specifically, we investigate how SOX8 influences the expression of lipogenic enzymes, thereby modulating the availability of acetyl-CoA and NADPH. Additionally, we explore the impact of SOX8 on the TCA cycle and pentose phosphate pathway, which are crucial metabolic pathways involved in lipid metabolism. Our findings demonstrate that SOX8 promotes ferroptosis and limits tumor growth in HCC cells by enhancing lipid peroxidation and facilitating the accumulation of ferrous ions.
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Reagents
Erastin (S7242, Selleck), Ferostatin-1(S7243, Selleck), CCCP (S6494, Selleck), propidium iodide (CA1040, Solarbio), BODIPY 581/591C11(D3861, Thermo), DCFH-DA (CA1410, Solardio), Doxycycline (#ST039A, Beyotime), FerroOrange (F374, DOJINDO). The Acetoacetyl CoA (2209206, Mlbio), GSH (ml076450, Mlbio), GSSH (ml076448, Mlbio) and NADPH/NADP (S0179, Beyotime), supernatant ROS (HR8821, Beyotime) were carried out following the manufacturers’ procedures described in the kits.
2.2
Plasmids and siRNA
The pcDNA3.1-SOX8 (SOX8-Full length/SOX8-F), pcDNA3.1-SOX8-truncated (SOX8-Truncated/SOX8-T) and pcDNA3.1-SOX8-mutant (SOX8-Mutant/SOX8-M) plasmids were constructed by Youbio (Hunan, China). The polycistronic human SOX8 and mCherry interspaced with an IRES element were expressed under the control of the tet-off system (named pCW-tet-off::SOX8). Briefly, TetR, which was synthesized by Qinglanbiotech (BGI, China), was cloned through XbaI and XmaI restriction sites into the lentiviral vector pCW-Cas9 (#50661, Addgene). In addition, SOX8 with a C-terminal 3xFLAG epitope and IRES-mCherry were amplified by PCR and inserted into the NheI and BamHI sites using the ClonExpress II One Step Cloning Kit (#C115-01, Vazyme). The tet-off inducible mCherry plasmid (named pCW-tet-off::mCherry) was also constructed. The AMPKα1, AMPKα2, Transferrin and scrambled siRNAs were synthesized by GenePharma (Shanghai, China). Cells were set up at proper density one day before transfection with Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher).
2.3
Cells and SOX8-knockout mice
HCC-LM3, HCC-97H, HCC-SNU423, HCC-HepG2, LNCaP and C4-2 cells originated from ATCC were purchased from Lookbio (Shanghai, China), which were identified by short tandem repeats and tested negative for mycoplasma by PCR before entering our laboratory in May 2017. The SOX8-knockout mice (C57BL/6J-Sox8
em1C
/Cya) and SOX8-KO HCC-97H cells from Cyagen Biosciences (Shuzhou, China) were constructed by CRISPR/Cas9. SOX8-KO HCC-97H cells were verified by sequencing and tested PCR negative for mycoplasma by PCR. Cells were maintained in DMEM medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS).
2.4
Generation of doxycycline inducible SOX8 stable cell line
HEK 293FT cells were grown in DMEM (#C11995500BT, Gibco) supplemented with 5 % FBS, 100 units/mL streptomycin, and 100 mg/mL penicillin (#15140122, Invitrogen). Lentiviral particles were generated by co-transfecting HEK 293FT cells with pCW-tet-off::SOX8 or pCW-tet-off::mCherry plasmid and virus packaging vectors (pVSV-G and psPAX2). PEI MAX (#24765-1, Polysciences) was utilized for transfection. Four hours after transfection, the medium was replaced. Virus supernatant was harvested 72 h post-transfection, filtered through a 0.45-μm PVDF filter, ultracentrifuged with a Beckman Coulter ultracentrifuges at 120,000×
g
for 2 h, and resuspended in PBS with a final volume of 50 μL. HCC-LM3 cells were infected with pCW-tet-off::SOX8 or pCW-tet-off::mCherry lentivirus at low confluency and 500 ng/mL doxycycline (#ST039A, Beyotime) was added to inhibit SOX8 expression. Two days later, the clones were isolated by applying 2 μg/mL puromycin (#ST551, Beyotime) for one week. Doxycycline was temporarily withdrawn to allow mCherry expression and sort doxycycline-responsive polyclones using FACS. HCC-LM3 cells with high expression of stable SOX8 were named as SOX8-LV, and the original cells were named as WT.
2.5
HCC xenograft model in mouse
Animal experiments were approved by the Ethical Review Committees of Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital and University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Mice were raised under a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle with standard housing condition. For the in vivo xenograft mouse model, WT and SOX8 stable (SOX8-LV) HCC-LM3 cells were inoculated by injecting 5 × 10
6
cells subcutaneously in the right flank of 6- to 8-week-old male SCID mice (Purchased from Hunan SJA Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd; n = 8 animals per group). The maximum width (W) and length (L) of the tumor were measured every other day by external caliper, and the volume (V) was calculated using the formula: V
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" version="1.0" width="20.666667pt" height="16.000000pt" viewBox="0 0 20.666667 16.000000" preserveAspectRatio="xMidYMid meet"><metadata>
Created by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019
</metadata><g transform="translate(1.000000,15.000000) scale(0.019444,-0.019444)" fill="currentColor" stroke="none"><path d="M0 440 l0 -40 480 0 480 0 0 40 0 40 -480 0 -480 0 0 -40z M0 280 l0 -40 480 0 480 0 0 40 0 40 -480 0 -480 0 0 -40z"/></g></svg>
(W
2
L)/2. The tumor volume was monitored under 2000 mm
3
, and the average diameter of tumors was smaller than 1.5 cm. If any tumor was beyond the above criteria, the mouse was immediately sacrificed and the whole experiment was end. Mice were all anaesthetized with CO
2
; tumors were taken out for photograph and measurement of weight, followed by histology analysis.
2.6
Histology analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Tissue array of HCC was obtained from Shanghai Outdo Biotech Co.LTD (Pudong, Shanghai, China). Human sample studies were carried out in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the ethical oversight committee of Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from subjects who participated in this study or from the legal guardians of minors. More information was described in the supplementary file.
Tissue samples from mice or human were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde, and sent to Servicebio (Wuhan, China) for Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE), Sirius red, Masson, Oil-red O staining. The IHC staining was performed with SP-link Detection and DAB Kits (ZSGB-Bio, PV-9000, ZLI-9017). The stained slides were checked and scored by two independent pathologists. Oil-red O staining for cultured HCC cells, 10 % paraformaldehyde was freshly diluted and incubated with HCC cells for 15 min. The fixed cells on glass coverslips were washed by 60 % isopropanol, then stained with Oil-red O for 20 min and counterstained with hematoxylin for 2 min. The intensity of staining was measured by Image-Pro plus software.
2.7
Western blotting
Cells or tissues were lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. After the protein concentration was normalized by BCA Protein Quantitative Kit, the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Anti-SOX8 (1:1000, 20627-1-AP), anti-15-LOX (1:1000, 13073-1-AP), anti-PKM1(1:1000, 15821-1-AP), anti-NRF2 (1:1000, 66504-1-Ig), anti-Transferrin (1:1000 17435-1-AP), anti-GPX4 (1:1000 67763-1-Ig), anti-ACLY (1:1000 15421-1-AP), anti-GAPDH (1:1000 60004-1-Ig), anti-TOM20 (1:1000 11802-1-AP), anti-TIM23 (1:1000 11123-1-AP), anti-G6PD (1:1000 66373-1-Ig), anti-INSIG1 (1:1000, 24766-1-AP), anti-INSIG2 (1:1000, 24766-1-AP), anti-DDK (1:1000, 66008-3-Ig), anti-AIF(1:1000, 17984-1-AP), anti-LPCAT3 (1:1000, 67882-1-AP) and anti-SLC7A11 (1:1000, 26864-1-AP) were purchased from Proteintech (Rosemount, IL, USA). Anti-SCD1(1:1000, 2794), anti-pACC (1:1000, 29119-1-AP), anti-ACC (1:1000, 3662), anti-FASN (1:1000, 3180), anti-Cleaved Caspase3 (1:1000, 9664), anti-LC3B (1:1000, 3868) were got from CST (Danvers, MA, USA). Anti-SREBP1 (1:1000, sc-13551) was from Santa Cruz. Anti-Transferrin Receptor (1:1000, ab214039), anti-pP53 (1:1000, ab1431), anti-AMPKα2 (1:1000, ab214425), anti-pAMPK (1:1000, ab133448), anti-ACSL4 (1:1000, ab155282) was from Abcam.
2.8
Flow cytometry
BODIPY 581/591C11 was used for lipid peroxidation detection. Cell death was measured by propidium iodide staining. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was detected by DCFH-DA staining (Solarbio, CA1410). The cellular Fe
2+
level was determined by FerroOrange (DOJINDO, F374). JC-1 (Applygen, C0008) was used for detecting mitochondrial membrane potential. Cells were seeded at a density of 30-45 % confluence into 12-well plates 24 h before treatment. A minimum of 10,000 single cells were analyzed per well and all experiments were carried out at least in triplicate.
2.9
Transmission electron microscope assay
Cells and tissue samples from individual groups were sent to the Chengdu Lilai Biotechnology Co. Ltd for transmission electron microscopy. Prefixed with a 3 % glutaraldehyde, then the tissue was postfixed in 1 % osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in acetone, infiltrated in EPON 812 and embed. These sections were stained with methylene blue and ultrathin sections were cut with diamond knife, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Sections were examined with JEM-1400-FLASH transmission electron microscope.
2.10
RNA extraction and real-time quantitative PCR
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Solarbio, R1100). The cDNA synthesis was conducted using HiScript III qRTSuperMix (Vazyme, R333-01). The qRT-PCR assay was performed with SYBR Green (Vazyme, Q711-02) following the manufacturer's protocols. A list of the primers (Qingke, Chengdu, China) used in this study is provided in
Supplementary Table 3
.
2.11
ChIP-qPCR analysis
Doxycycline was removed from LM3 cells with a tet-off SOX8 system for three days to allow SOX8 expression. Protein–DNA complexes were crosslinked with 1 % formaldehyde (Sigma, #F8775) at room temperature for 10 min and then quenched with 125 mM glycine for 5 min. Following washing, cells were lysed for 10 min at 4 °C in 0.5 mL of cold lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 % SDS, 0.25 % Triton X-100, 10 % Glycerol, 150 mM NaCl and complete protease inhibitor cocktail). The nuclei were resuspended in 0.2 mL sonication buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 % SDS and complete protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated (20 % amplitude, 30 s on 30 s off, total 10 min) in an ultrasonic processor (Sonics and Materials) to shear the DNA into 200- to 500- bp fragments. The supernatant was diluted and 50 μL supernatant was reserved as input control. The immunoprecipitation was performed overnight at 4 °C with 30 μL Anti-Flag Magnetic Beads (Beyotime, #P2115) or Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen, #10003D). After washing, the purified material was eluted from the beads twice using 50 μL elution buffer (0.1 M NaHCO
3
and 1 % SDS) for 30 min at 65 °C. The eluents and inputs supplied at a final concentration of 200 mM NaCl were reverse-crosslinked overnight at 65 °C. The resulting genomic DNA fragments were then purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, #28104) following the manufacturer's instructions. qPCR was used to evaluate the enrichment of samples. The ChIP-qPCR primers were designed to target the –2000 to 0 bp DNA region relative to the TSS of the examined genes.
2.12
Omics analyses
The cells were collected and rapidly frozen using liquid nitrogen in accordance with the sample delivery specifications provided by Biomarker Technologies. The processed samples were transported using dry ice to facilitate subsequent proteomics, lipidomics and central carbon metabolomics analyses. Each group consisted of 1 × 10
7
cells, and a total of 3-5 independent samples were prepared. The raw data for Omics are included in
Supplementary Tables S4–S7
. Omics analyses were performed by Biomarker Technologies following their corresponding protocol. We briefly described them as below:
Proteomics:
after protein extraction, digestion and lyophilization, the identification of peptide was conducted using label-free mass spectrometry (Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry). The database used in this experiment is Uniprot HUMAN (2019.4.20 Down load) database. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant 1.5.2.8. According to the p-value of primary data, the data with p ≤ 0.05 and difference ratio ≥1.2 were selected for further analysis.
Table S4
are proteomics data for CTL and SOX8-high LM3 cells.
Metabolomics:
cell supernatant obtained from the standard procedure of metabolites extraction was subjected to HPIC-MRM-MS analysis. The HPIC separation was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex ICS-6000 HPIC System (Thermo Scientific). An AB SCIEX 6500 QTRAP + triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB Sciex), equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) interface, was applied for assay development. AB SCIEX Analyst Work Station Software (1.6.3 AB SCIEX), MultiQuant 3.0.3 software and Chromeleon7 were employed for MRM data acquisition and processing.
Table S5
are metabolomics data for CTL and SOX8-high LM3 cells.
Lipidomics:
Metabolite extraction and mass spectrometry detection was processed using Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography-mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) of Biomarker Technologies (Beijing, China). The LC/MS system for metabolomics analysis is composed of Waters Acquity I-Class PLUS ultra-high performance liquid tandem Waters Xevo G2-XS QTof high resolution mass spectrometer. The raw data collected using MassLynx V4.2 is processed by Progenesis QI software for peak extraction, peak alignment and other data processing operations, based on the Progenesis QI software online METLIN database and Biomark's self-built library for identification. All data processing and analysis was performed on biomarker cloud platform (
http://www.biocloud.net
). After normalizing the original peak area information with the total peak area, the follow-up analysis was performed.
Table S6
are lipidomics data for CTL and SOX8-high LM3 cells.
Table S7
are lipidomics data for WT and SOX8-KO 97H cells.
2.13
Mito Tracker Red CMXRos probe staining
LM3 cells were cultured using cell climbing tablets. After incubating with the Mito Tracker Red CMXRos (150 nM) for 30 min, the LM3 cells were fixed with 3.7 % formaldehyde at 37 °C for an additional 15 min. A series of random images were captured with a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal scanning microscope. The fluorescence intensity and colocation ratio were measured by Zen software.
2.14
Detection of mitochondrial respiratory function
The detection of mitochondrial respiratory function in HCC-LM3 cells was conducted using an Oroboros Oxygraph-2k (Innsbruck, Austria) in a thermostat-controlled chamber. The HCC-LM3 cells were transfected with either a vehicle or pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 for 48 h or 72 h. A total of 1 × 10
6
cells were used to quantify the rate of oxygen consumption. Following the process of equilibration, oligomycin (5 nM), FCCP (0.5 μM) and Antimycin A (2.5 μM) were sequentially added to inhibit ATPase, complex I and complex III, respectively. The three inhibitors were purchased from Huawei corporation (Cat:023004). All data were recorded with DatLab acquisition software 5.2 (Oroboros Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria).
2.15
Cell viability assay
Viable cells were measured using Cell Counting Kit-8 (Biosharp, BS3508). Cells were seeded onto 96-well plates at a density of 10
4
per well one day before being transfected with according plasmids. The absorbance at a wavelength of 450 nm was determined.
2.16
Statistical analysis
All studies were conducted with a minimum of three repetitions or a sample size of at least three. Data were presented as means ± S.D. Data were analyzed with GraphPad Prism software (version 7; GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA). Differences between groups were analyzed by two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. One-way ANOVA test was used for analysing the difference among multi-groups. For statistical correlation, Pearson's correlation coefficient was used.
p
< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
P
values for all data were shown in each figure panel.
2.17
Data availability statement
Data are available in the article itself.
Tables S1–S7
,
Figs. S1–S7
and figure source data are online supplemental materials.
3
Results
3.1
High SOX8 expression prolongs HCC patients’ survival by promoting ferroptosis of cancer cells
There is a lot of evidence to imply a potential association between SOX8 and the advancement of multiple cancers [
28
,
29
]. We initially analyzed SOX8 expression by immunohistochemical staining in a total of 80 HCC tissues and their adjacent normal tissues (
Table S1
). The results indicate that SOX8 protein levels were raised in HCC tumors in comparison to normal tissues (
Fig. 1
a and b). The expression of SOX8 was observed in both the nucleus (black arrowhead) and cytoplasm (red arrowhead) (
Fig. 1
a). Based on the role of SOX8 as a transcriptional factor, the majority of SOX8 positive sections (53.55 %) exhibited strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining (
Fig. S1a
), suggesting that SOX8 may exert cytoplasmic effects. To further investigate the role of SOX8 in HCC, we used Kaplan-Meier analysis, which revealed that HCC patients exhibiting elevated levels of SOX8 expression experienced enhanced overall survival rates (
Fig. 1
c). It is posited that there exists a potential association between SOX8 and the process of cellular survival of HCC. To test this hypothesis, LM3 cells were subjected to transient transfection with an overexpression plasmid containing SOX8 or a control plasmid for cell proliferation analysis. As anticipated, the upregulation of SOX8 expression result in the inhibition of cell proliferation (
Fig. S1b
). In addition, overexpression of SOX8 also decreased survival of HepG2 and LNCaP cells (
Fig. S1c
). Together, these results indicate that SOX8 may play a protective role in individuals with HCC.
Fig. 1
High SOX8 expression prolongs HCC patient survival by promoting ferroptosis.
(a) Representative IHC images of SOX8 staining in human HCC tumors and adjacent tissues. The cytosolic and nuclear staining for SOX8 was denoted by a black and a red arrowhead, respectively.
(b) Quantification of SOX8 expression in 80 pairs of human HCC samples, based on the staining intensity multiplied by the extent score. The p-value was calculated by Student's t-test.
(c) Kaplan-Meier analyses were separately performed for HCC patients with high versus low SOX8 expression (The data were obtained from the TCGA and GEO databases).
(d) TEM images of LM3 cells subjected to the indicated treatments for 24 h. The red arrowhead indicates mitochondria. CTL: control; SOX8-high: pcDNA-3.1-SOX8; Ferrostatin-1(Fer-1): 40 μΜ.
(e) Lipid peroxidation and cell death were measured by flow cytometry 24 h after treatment of LM3, HepG2 and SNU423 cells with the indicated agents. (Data represent as mean ± SD of 3 experiments). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 1
We initially hypothesized that SOX8 may regulate AKT activation. Nevertheless, neither phospho-S473-AKT nor PCNA expression was altered (
Fig. S1d
). We then suspected that SOX8 was involved in apoptotic or autophagy signaling. However, overexpression of SOX8 induced cell death without altering the expression of cleaved caspase-3, p-p53, LC3B, PI3KCIII or p62 (
Figs. S1d and S1e
). To clarify the cellular state associated with elevated SOX8 expression, we examined these cells by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The results revealed that LM3 cells with elevated SOX8 exhibited shrunken mitochondria (smaller, diminished or vanished mitochondrial crista) and increased membrane density, but lacked compacted chromatin fragmentation in the nucleus (
Fig. 1
d), a morphologic hallmark of ferroptosis. In addition, numerous cancer cells, such as HepG2 and SNU423 LNCaP, exhibited SOX8-induced cell death and lipid peroxidation (LPO), which was reversible by the ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) (
Fig. 1
d and e and
S1f
).
It is noteworthy that the impacts of SOX8-induced ferroptosis and lipid peroxidation are not solely reliant on cystine depletion. SOX8 did not change SLC7A11 expression (
Fig. S1g
), the main transporter for cystine. Furthermore, SOX8 bear resemblance to the ferroptosis effect induced by the system X
c
-
inhibitor Erastin (
Fig. S1h
). This suggests that SOX8 has the potential to autonomously trigger robust signaling pathways associated with ferroptosis.
3.2
SOX8 controls de novo lipogenesis through regulating key lipogenic enzymes
As ferroptosis, which requires phospholipid peroxidation, is frequently involved in cancer progression [
30
]. To determine if SOX8 regulates ferroptosis by modulating cellular lipid metabolism, we performed untargeted lipidomic analyses on SOX8-high expression LM3 and wild-type (CTL) cells using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS). As shown in
Fig. 2
a, the overexpression of SOX8 resulted in a notable reduction in the levels of 81 lipid species in comparison to the CTL group (FDR-corrected P<0.05; fold change>1.5). The lipids that were downregulated primarily consisted of CL, PA, PC, PE and PI, which are essential compositions of the mitochondrial membrane. The upregulation of SOX8 expression in LM3 cells decreased cellular lipid accumulation, as shown by the Oil red staining (
Fig. S2a
). In addition, the intracellular triglyceride and cholesterol levels were dramatically diminished in cells with high expression of SOX8 compared to CTL cells (
Fig. S2b
). The results of our study indicate that the upregulation of SOX8 inhibits the lipid metabolism in cancer cells.
Fig. 2
SOX8 inhibits de novo lipogenesis in cancer cells.
(a) Heat maps of significantly changed lipid species as determined by lipidomic analysis (two-tailed, unpaired student's
t
-test; fold-change threshold = 1.0; FDR-corrected
P
< 0.05;
n
= 5) between CTL and SOX8-high (pcDNA-3.1-SOX8) LM3 cells. Cer: ceramide, CL: cardiolipin, PA: phosphatidic acid, PC: phosphatidylcholine, PE: phosphatidylethanolamine, PG: phosphatidylglycerol, PI: phosphatidylcholine, PS: phosphatidylserine, DG: diacylglycerol, TG: triglyceride, MGTG Mono-Galactosyl-Diaclyglycerol.
(b) GSEA signature map for lipid metabolism genes.
(c, d) The protein expression level of fatty acid synthetase with semi-quantitative analysis were detected by western blotting in LM3 and HepG2 cells after being transfected with CTL or pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 (SOX8-high) for 24 h (Data represent as mean ± SD of 3 experiments).
Fig. 2
To elucidate the mechanism whereby SOX8 influences aberrant lipid metabolism in HCC cells, we carried out unbiased quantitative proteomic analysis on LM3 cells with high levels of SOX8 expression, as well as CTL cells. As shown in
Fig. S2c
, the expression profiles of numerous proteins exhibited alterations. The GO biological analysis revealed that an elevated level of SOX8 had a detrimental effect on the expression of proteins associated with cell metabolism, particularly lipid metabolism (
Fig. 2
b and
S2d
). Specifically, we found that the enzymes involved in the process of fatty acid (FA) synthesis, including ACC1, were changed (
Fig. S2e
). The protein levels of the key lipogenic enzymes SREBP1, FASN, ACLY, ACC1 and SCD1 were drastically diminished in various cancer cell lines (LM3, HepG2, C4-2 and LNCaP) upon overexpression of SOX8, as shown by western blotting analysis (
Fig. 2c–d and S2f
).
To gain further insight of SOX8-mediated lipid metabolism, we constructed SOX8 knockout HCC-97H cells using CRISPR technology. An elevation in lipid synthesis, lipid droplets, and lipogenic enzymes was discovered in SOX8 knockout cells (
Fig. 3
a-c). The deficiency of SOX8 in mice at 8 months of age was found to contribute to the development of steatosis and liver fibrosis. This was supported by several indicators, including an elevated liver index, increased levels of blood total cholesterol (
TC
) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), the presence of lipid droplets, and an increase in collagen deposition (
Fig. 3
d-f). These findings provide confirmation that SOX8 plays a regulatory role in the production of lipogenic enzymes, hence exerting control over the process of de novo lipogenesis.
Fig. 3
Loss of SOX8 enhances lipid deposition in HCC cells and promotes liver fibrosis in mice.
(a) Upregulated lipid species based on lipidomic analysis (two-tailed, unpaired student's
t
-test; fold-change threshold = 1.0; FDR-corrected
P
< 0.05;
n
= 5) between WT and SOX8-KO HCC-97H cell.
(b) The protein expression level of fatty acid synthetase with their corresponding quantitative analysis were detected by western blotting in WT and SOX8-knock out HCC-97H cell.
(c) Representative images and quantitative analysis of lipid droplets in WT and SOX8-KO HCC-97H cells using the Oil-red assay (Data represent as mean ± SD (n = 3) of 3 experiments).
(d) Representative images of H&E, Masson, Sirus red and Oil-red staining of the liver tissues from WT and SOX8-KO female mice (n = 6 for each group).
(e) The liver/body weight, serum ALT and TC levels were measured for the indicated WT and SOX8-KO groups (mean ± SD, n = 6 for each group).
(f) Quantification of IHC results for collagen contents, liver fibrosis and lipid droplets in the corresponding liver slides. The data are displayed as means ± SD (n = 6). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 3
However, the mechanism by which SOX8 regulates the expression of lipogenic enzymes remains unclear. AMPK is intimately linked to the regulation of lipid metabolism [
23
]. We hypothesized that overexpressed SOX8 would result in its localization in the cytoplasm, leading to the inhibition of SREBP-1 expression through the activation of AMPK. Consequently, an increase in AMPK expression and p-AMPK levels was observed in LM3, SNU423, 97H and HepG2 cells overexpressing SOX8 (
Fig. S3a
), indicating that SOX8 induces AMPK activation. The suppression of AMPK expression through siRNA did not result in any observable impact on the upregulation of p-AMPK and the downregulation of SREBP1, ACC and p-ACC induced by SOX8 (
Fig. S3b
). This suggests that AMPK activation is controlled by an alternative mechanism. Because AMPK activity is dependent on the intracellular AMP/ADP:ATP ratio [
31
], a study utilizing GC/MS was conducted to examine the metabolomic effects of SOX8 overexpression. The results of this research demonstrated a significant increase in both the AMP/ADP and AMP/ATP ratios. Collectively, SOX8 has the potential to regulate the activity of SREBP-1 by directing AMPK activity via metabolic cues.
3.3
SOX8 destroys the mitochondrial structure and the functionality of electron transport chain
Given the observed inhibitory effect of SOX8 overexpression on FA synthesis, it is plausible to consider whether an elevation in LPO could be attributed to an upregulation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) catalyzed by increased expression of ACSL4 and LPCAT3. Unexpectedly, our observations revealed a notable reduction in expression levels of ACSL4 and LPCAT3 (
Fig. S4a
). This finding suggests that the aggravation of LPO alone occurs at the critical stage initiated by ROS.
Considering that SOX8 triggered elevated levels of intracellular and secretory ROS in cancer cells (
Figs. S4b and S4c
) and that mitochondria are the primary organelles responsible for ROS production, we hypothesized that SOX8 may mediate ROS accumulation by depending on mitochondrial dysfunction. Initially, we overexpressed SOX8 in LM3 cells and utilized CCCP (carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazine), a well-known uncoupling agent of oxidative phosphorylation, as a positive pharmacological compound to induce depolarization of the mitochondria. After undergoing treatment for either 24 or 48 h, the indicated groups were used for TEM examination. In untreated LM3 cells, the mitochondria exhibited a tubular network distributed evenly throughout the cell. Vacuolar degeneration and network fragmentation were observed in the mitochondria of cells subjected to CCCP treatment. Accordingly, a range of 30 %–80 % of the cells exhibiting high levels of SOX8 underwent ferroptosis during the time frame of 24 to 48 h. Furthermore, these cells demonstrated mitochondrial morphological changes that were comparable to those observed in LM3 cells treated with CCCP (
Fig. 4
a and
S4d
).
ROS accumulation in SOX8-high cells was comparable to that of the CCCP group, but SOX8-induced LPO and cell death were substantially more pronounced (
Fig. 4
b), indicating that SOX8 disrupted the electron transport chain (ETC) by destroying the mitochondrial membrane. KEGG analysis of proteomic data revealed that SOX8 affected NADP metabolism, aerobic respiration and ATPase binding (
Fig. S4e
). In SOX8-high cells, the expression of mitochondrial membrane proteins such as TIM16, TOM20 and TIM50 decreased (
Fig. 4
c). Western blotting analysis confirmed that SOX8 inhibited the expression of TOM20, a mitochondrial outer membrane protein, whereas CCCP suppressed the expression of TIM23, an inner membrane protein that mediates vital protein translocation from the cytoplasm to mitochondrial subcompartments (
Fig. 4
d). Numerous ATP production-related proteins (V-type proton ATPase 116KD subunit a1, mitochondrial proton/calcium exchanger protein, ADP/ATP translocase 2 and ATPase inhibitor) were either down- or up-regulated in response to SOX8 overexpression (
Fig. 4
c). Meanwhile, SOX8 changed the expression of ETC components (NADH dehydrogenase, Cytochrome C oxidase and Quinone oxidoreductase, etc.) and ribosome composition (
Figs. S4f and S4g
).
Fig. 4
SOX8 destroys the mitochondrial structure and electron transport chain.
(a) TEM images of LM3 cells subjected to the indicated treatments for 24 or 48 h. The red arrowhead indicates mitochondria. CTL: control; SOX8-high: pcDNA-3.1-SOX8; CCCP: 10 μΜ.
(b) ROS production, Lipid peroxidation and cell death were detected by flow cytometry in LM3 cells after 24 h treatment with the indicated agents as above (Data represent as mean ± SD; n = 3).
(c) Heat maps showing that SOX8 affects the expression levels of the proteins on the mitochondrial membrane based on proteomic analysis (fold change >1.0 and P<0.05). LM3 cells were transfected with vehicle or pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 for 24 h; and the proteins were extracted, separated, and identified by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.
(d) The protein expression of Tom20 and Tim23 was detected by western blotting in LM3 cells after 24 h with indicated treatment as above.
(e) The MMP levels were measured by JC-1 staining in LM3 cells treated as described above (Data represent as mean ± SD; n = 3).
(f, g) The oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of mitochondria in LM3 cells transfected either pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 or not. Oligomycin (Omy) was used to measure ATP-related respiration; FCCP was used to determine the maximal uncoupled respiratory capacity of ETC; Antimycin A (Ama) was used to detect residual oxygen consumption. Data represent as mean ± SD; n = 3. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 4
To demonstrate the role of SOX8 in regulating ETC, we monitored the change of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using JC-1. The MMP declined in both CCCP-treated and SOX8-high cells (
Fig. 4
e), confirming that SOX8 caused the mitochondrial injury. We further examined the effect of SOX8-overexpresion on mitochondrial respiration in LM3 cells using the Oroboros Oxygraph-2k respirometer. The respiratory assay showed that SOX8 significantly inhibited the basal, maximal and ATP-linked respiration (
Fig. 4
f and 4g). These findings together indicate that SOX8 elevates ROS generation by impairing the mitochondrial ETC.
3.4
SOX8 interferes with the glucose metabolism and the redox system
As a result of mitochondrial damage caused by SOX8 overexpression, the entire glucose metabolism was disrupted (
Fig. S5a
). Metabolites of glycolysis, TCA cycle and PPP were quantified by GC/MS metabolomic analysis. SOX8 overexpression did not result in any significant changes in the levels of early glycolytic intermediates. However, it did lead to a significant decrease in the accumulation of pyruvate and lactate (
Fig. S5b
), followed by a notable fall in Acyl-CoA levels (
Fig. 5
b). Furthermore, it was observed that the levels of TCA intermediates were significantly reduced (
Fig. 5
a), suggesting that the activity of SOX8 has a detrimental effect on the rotation of TCA cycle. Consequently, the generation of ATP and GTP was shown to be diminished (
Fig. S5c
).
Fig. 5
SOX8 disrupts the glucose metabolism and redox balance of HCC cells.
(a, c) Metabolites of TCA cycle and PPP were measured by GC/MS metabolomic analysis in LM3 cells after being transfected with CTL or pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 (SOX8-high) for 24 h
(b, d-f) Acyl-CoA, NADP+/NADPH, reduced glutathione and ROS were assessed in LM3 cells after 24 h treatment (mean ± SD, n≥3).
(g) Heat maps showing that SOX8 affect the protein expression levels of the antioxidative system from proteomic analysis (fold change >1.0 and P<0.05). LM3 cells were treated as described above.
Fig. 5
PPP has a crucial role as a vital supplier of NADPH, a molecule that is intricately linked to the synthesis of FA and cholesterol. Additionally, NADPH is essential in the preservation of reduced glutathione (GSH), a critical component in cellular redox homeostasis. Remarkably, PPP suffered substantial impairment followed with SOX8 overexpression (
Fig. 5
c), accompanied by a reduction in the ratio of NADPH/NADP (
Fig. 5
d). Simultaneously, it was observed that the decreased GSH levels in cells with high expression of SOX8 (
Fig. 5
e) were concomitant with an elevation in intracellular ROS (
Fig. 5
f).
To investigate the underlying mechanism by which SOX8 affects glucose metabolism, proteomic data was studied. Several glycolysis and glycogen synthesis-related proteins were downregulated or upregulated upon SOX8 overexpression (
Fig. S5d
). It was notable that glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and pyruvate kinase 1 (PKM1) was decreased in SOX8 overexpressed LM3 cells (
Fig. S5e
), suggesting that SOX8 may also exert regulatory control over the rate-limiting enzymes involved in glucose metabolism. In addition, it was observed that the redox system exhibited significant disturbances in cells with high levels of SOX8. Specifically, there was an increase in the expression of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase-Mn (SOD-Mn), thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) and gamma-glutamyltransferase 7 (GGT7), whereas the expression of thiosulfate sulfurtransferase (TST) decreased (
Fig. 5
g). In summary, it can be concluded that the inhibitory effect of SOX8 on the synthesis of FA synthesis and GSH is achieved by its interference with glucose metabolism, namely by impeding the production of Acyl-CoA and NADPH. This establishes a feedback loop that exacerbates the mitochondrial structure and antioxidant system, leading to ROS accumulation.
3.5
SOX8-regulated transferrin promotes the fenton reaction and ferroptosis
The KEGG analysis revealed that SOX8 overexpression altered ferrous iron binding and glutathione metabolism (
Fig. S6a
). The levels of transferrin, transferrin receptor protein 1 (TFRC), Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), ferritin heavy chain 1 were elevated, while the levels of hemoglobin subunits alpha and beta were decreased (
Fig. 6
a). The findings from both qRT-PCR and Western blotting analyses provided separate validation of the upregulation of TFRC, Transferrin and 15-LOX by SOX8, as well as the downregulation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) and GPX4 (
Fig. 6
b and
S6b
). Therefore, it was hypothesized that an excess of SOX8 might potentially enhance the Fenton reaction by the facilitation of Fe
2+
inflow. The intracellular concentration of ferrous ion was found to be elevated via fluorescent probe detection (
Fig. 6
c).
Fig. 6
SOX8-mediated transferrin expression enhances the Fenton reaction and ferroptosis in HCC cells.
(a) Heat maps showing that SOX8 alters the expression levels of ferroptosis-related proteins based on proteomic analysis (fold change >1.0 and P<0.05) in LM3 cells after being transfected with CTL or pcDNA-3.1-SOX8 (SOX8-high) for 24 h
(b) The expression levels of ferroptosis-related proteins (NRF2, GPX4, 15-LOX and Transferrin) were detected by western blotting in LM3 cells treated as described above (Data represent as mean ± SD (n = 3) of 3 experiments).
(c) The ferrous iron level was measured by flow cytometry in LM3 cells with different treatments for 24 and 48 h (mean ± SD, n = 3). CTL: Control; SOX8-high: pcDNA-3.1-SOX8; Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1): 40 μΜ. (Data represent as mean ± SD (n = 3) of 3 experiments).
(d) Lipid peroxidation, cell death and Fe
2+
levels were detected by flow cytometry in LM3 cells 48 h after the silencing of
Transferrin
genes with siRNA (mean ± SD, n = 3). siTF: siRNA for Transferrin. (Data represent as mean ± SD (n = 3) of 3 experiments).
(e) ChIP-qPCR results for SOX8-regulated genes using FLAG antibody and normal IgG in WT and SOX8-LV cells (mean ± SD, n = 4).
(f) The relative activity of luciferase reporters for
Transferrin
genes was determined in LM3 cells (mean ± SD, n = 3). Cells were separately transfected with SOX8-F, SOX8-T and SOX8-M plasmids as indicated.
Fig. 6
To determine the crucial role of SOX8-mediated transferrin in ferroptosis, we transfected transferrin siRNA into LM3 cells with high levels of SOX8 (
Fig. S6c
) and analyzed the changes in cellular Fe
2+
levels, lipid ROS and cell death. The results demonstrated that the inhibition of transferrin had the ability to reverse SOX8-induced Fe
2+
influx, reduce lipid ROS levels, and inhibit ferroptosis (
Fig. 6
d).
Being similar with other family members, SOX8 has a conserved binding motif “AACAAT” that is responsible for regulating gene expression [
32
](
Fig. S6d
). We postulated that SOX8 may function as a transcription factor during ferroptosis. Using the JASPAR tool for transcription factor binding analysis, we identified potential SOX8 binding sites within a 2-kb region located upstream of genes associated with ferroptosis, namely
GPX4
,
NRF2
and
TF
. We established an LM3 cell line with SOX8 inducible expression using the “Tet-Off” systems by means of lentivirus-mediated infection (SOX8-LV) (
Figs. S7a–S7d
). The ChIP-qPCR assays were performed in WT and SOX8-LV cells to determine the potential interaction between SOX8 and the putative promoter region. The results revealed that SOX8 has binding affinity towards the promoter regions of ferroptosis-associated genes (
Fig. 6
e). Moreover, the luciferase reporter assay was utilized to verify the direct binding effect. Three plasmids were generated in this study, including the full-length SOX8 (referred to as SOX8-F), the DNA binding domain truncation variant (referred to as SOX8-T) and the transcriptional activation domain mutant with the QYL residues replaced by RDD (referred to as SOX8-M) (
Fig. S6e
). The overexpression of the
Transferrin
gene was seen to be enhanced by SOX8-F, while SOX8-T did not exhibit any reversal of this effect (
Fig. 6
f). However, it was found that SOX8-M effectively counteracted this overexpression (
Fig. 6
f). These results demonstrate that SOX8 has the potential to modulate Transferrin transcription via its transcriptional activation domain by interacting with other transcription factors.
3.6
High SOX8 expression leads to tumor regression in vivo
To evaluate the relationship between SOX8 and transferrin in vivo, we examined the expression levels of SOX8, transferrin, and 4-hydroxy-2-noneal (4-HNE), a marker for lipid peroxidation, in 35 paired-adjacent and tumor tissues obtained from HCC patients using IHC staining (
Table S2
). The results showed that the staining intensity of SOX8, transferrin and 4-HNE in the tumor was considerably greater compared to the neighboring normal tissues (
Fig. 7
a). Furthermore, we conducted association analyses for SOX8, transferrin and 4-HNE expression individually in human HCC samples. A positive association was observed between SOX8, transferrin and 4-HNE (
Fig. 7
b). These findings demonstrate that a strong association between the expression of transferrin and LPO, mediated by SOX8, and the progression of HCC.
Fig. 7
High SOX8 expression results in tumor regression in vivo.
(a) Representative IHC images and quantitative analysis of the expression levels of SOX8, Transferrin and 4-HNE in 35 pairs of human HCC samples. The p-value was calculated by Student's t-test.
(b) Analysis of the correlation between the expression levels of SOX8, Transferrin and 4-HNE expression in 35 pairs of human HCC samples.
(c) Images of tumors resected from mice xenografted with either WT or SOX8-LV LM3 cells (n = 8 per group).
(d) Growth curves of LM3 tumors within the specified groups. Data are plotted as mean ± SD, n = 8, on the linear scale for actual tumor size.
(e) The relative tumor weight (tumor/body weight) was determined for each group after euthanizing the animals (n = 8 per group; mean ± SD).
(f) Representative IHC images and quantification of SOX8 and Transferrin staining in tumor sections from mice xenografted with WT and SOX8-LV LM3 cells (n = 3 per group, mean ± SD).
Fig. 7
To further investigate the potential impact of SOX8 in inhibiting tumor growth in vivo, we generated a mouse xenograft model using SOX8-LV and WT LM3 cells. The mice xenografted with these cells were let to attain an average tumor diameter of around 1.5 cm and a volume below 2000 mm
3
prior to their sacrifice for the purpose of histopathology analysis. The overexpression of SOX8 was shown to be associated with a substantial reduction in tumor size (
Fig. 7
c and
S7e
). This conclusion is supported by the observed decrease in tumor volume, relative tumor weight and a decrease in the proliferation of Ki67-stained cells (
Fig. 7
d and e and
S7f
). Moreover, the overexpression of SOX8 was found to significantly enhance the expression of transferrin (
Fig. 7
f). Together, these in vivo findings demonstrate conclusively that an elevated expression of SOX8 serves as a protective factor against the advancement of HCC.
4
Discussion
Liver cancer is closely linked to aberrant cellular metabolism such as glucose metabolism and lipid metabolism [
33
]. There are clues that ROS generation is diminished in liver cancer [
34
]. In addition, Nrf2 has been shown to promote the expression of a set of reductases that inhibit ferroptosis by limiting ROS production in HCC [
35
]. Nevertheless, the existence of ferroptotic positive regulatory transcription factors remains questionable. This study elucidated the role of the transcription factor SOX8 in coordinating four separate mechanisms to promote HCC ferroptosis (
Fig. 8
). 1) The redox balance can be disrupted by downregulating the PPP through the utilization of NADPH, thereby closing the turnover between reduced glutathione (GSH) and oxidized glutathione (GSSG). 2) The accumulation of ROS can be enhanced by impairing the ETC through the damage of mitochondrial membranes, which in turn is caused by the repression of lipogenesis. 3) The expression of transferrin can be upregulated to promote an increase in the cellular labile iron pool and subsequently facilitate the Fenton reaction. 4) The expression of GPX4 can be reduced while simultaneously increasing the expression of 15-LOX to expedite LPO.
Fig. 8
Proposed model for SOX8 triggered ferroptosis in HCC.
The illustration was created by Figdraw (
https://www.figdraw.com
; Authorized ID: RWIWAbaa4a).
Fig. 8
Numerous cancer cells proliferate vigorously and exhibit apoptosis resistance. Therefore, strategies that can inhibit cancer cells proliferation without inducing apoptosis presents potential therapeutic prospects for the control of tumors [
36
]. Unlike other forms of programmed cell death that require the upregulation or activation of a specific pro-death effector, ferroptosis defines cancer cell sensitivity through the depletion of GPX4, the accumulation of redox-active iron and PUFA-PL [
37
]. Consequently, ferroptosis-related genes that inhibit GPX4 expression and its enzymatic activity, increasing intracellular iron levels, and elevating PUFA-PL peroxidation are commonly employed as tumor therapeutic targets [
38
]. Transcription factors that render cancer cells sensitive to ferroptosis are of particular interest, because they may serve as a central integrator synthesizing glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, iron metabolism, and redox homeostasis. For example, the p53 3 KR mutant makes cancer cells more susceptible to ferroptosis via the apoptotic-independent pathway by limiting the SLC7A11 expression [
39
]. In addition, the cyclic AMP-dependent transcription factor ATF3, an endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor, can also promote ferroptosis by inhibiting SLC7A11 expression in a manner independent of p53 [
40
]. Nrf2, a master anti-oxidant transcription factor, can transactivate a panel of ferroptosis-related genes, such as SLC7A11, GPX4, and ferritin-regulated genes that are involved in redox homeostasis and iron metabolism, to combat ferroptosis [
34
,
35
]. In our study, SOX8 was found to have potent ferroptosis-promoting effects via reprogramming of the lipid, glucose and iron metabolisms, as well as the redox system. In addition, SOX8-driven ferroptosis is efficient and effective against prostate cancer cells with a high lipid demand. SOX8 does not require cystine deprivation to induce ferroptosis and has the same lethal effect as the system Xc
-
inhibitor erastin.
Cellular energy status determines ferroptosis vulnerability in certain types of cancer cells. Lee et al. found that inactivating AMPK, a central cellular energy sensor, could potentially increase the vulnerability of cancer cells with high basal AMPK activity to ferroptosis when subjected to circumstances of energy stress [
12
]. Mechanically, AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of ACC and PUFA biosynthesis may inhibit ferroptosis to some extent in responding to energy stress [
12
]. It is well known that glycolysis and the TCA cycle are required for the production of acetyl-CoA, a precursor for de novo lipid synthesis. According to our findings, the ectopic expression of SOX8 in HCC cells substantially decreased acetyl-CoA production and inhibited PPP activity. The latter is the source of NADPH, an additional key component of de novo lipogenesis, and the redox equivalent for maintaining reduced GSH. We further identified that SOX8 could inhibit the expression of a series of vital enzymes responsible for glucose catabolism, including G6PD and PKM1, thereby activating the cellular energy sensor AMPK to inhibit lipogenesis via phosphorylation of SREBP-1 and ACC. Moreover, mice lacking SOX8 had elevated lipid accumulation, steatosis and liver fibrosis, indicating that SOX8 is a novel regulator implicated in the regulation of de novo lipogenesis. In short, SOX8 inhibits lipid synthesis via two distinct mechanisms: 1) lowering the activity of lipogenic enzymes by activating AMPK-dependent SREBP-1 phosphorylation, and 2) limiting the supply of raw material, including acetyl-CoA and NADPH, for lipid synthesis by restricting the turnover of glycolysis, the TCA cycle and PPP.
Mitochondria, as the primary generator of ROS, are intimately engaged in cysteine deprivation-induced ferroptosis, which necessitates the TCA cycle and ETC [
22
]. According to our findings, the upregulation of SOX8 leads to an elevation in ROS generation and lipid peroxidation. In addition, SOX8 overexpression result in impairments of the integrity and functioning of the mitochondria. It is reasonable to believe that the suppression of membrane biogenesis mediated by SOX8 may be a potential source of mitochondrial injuries.
SOX8 simultaneously promotes the intracellular iron accumulation by transactivating the expression of transferrin and its associated regulatory proteins. Ultimately, the leaked ROS reacted with iron and PUFA in the Fenton reaction to generate oxidizable phospholipids. Importantly, our observations indicate that elevated SOX8 expression could repress the growth of transplanted HCC cells in vivo. This finding may provide a plausible explanation for the correlation between high SOX8 expression and improved survival rates among HCC patients.
In conclusion, SOX8 promotes ferroptosis in HCC through the coordination of many processes. These mechanisms include the regulation of glucose consumption, the restriction of lipogenesis, the release of ROS generated by mitochondria, and the elevation of iron levels. Therefore, the multiple targeting potential of SOX8 can be utilized as an effective cancer therapy.
Authorship contribution statement
X Yang, C Gu, JS Cai and FY Li carried out the experiments, acquired the raw data and did analysis. X He, LN Luo, WG Xiao and BY Hu assisted to complete experiments in vivo and vitro. J Hu, H Qian, SQ Ren, L Zhang, XJ Zhu, L Yang and J Yang helped to interpretation of data and revised the manuscript. C Gu also collected part of clinical human HCC samples and assist histological evaluation. ZY Wang, X Huang, Y Zheng and ZL Yang are responsible for study design and conception, interpretation of data and supporting research fund. ZY Wang wrote the manuscript.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.