Introduction
Efforts to decode the foundational components
of human existence
span across multiple levels. An increasing number of global initiatives
are aiming to thoroughly map genes and proteins. Proteins play indispensable
roles in orchestrating biological processes, and characterizing their
expression and function is profoundly necessary to enhance our insights
into human health.
The Human Proteome Project (HPP) is an international
initiative
led by the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO), with the primary goal
of comprehensively characterizing and understanding the human proteome.
1
Accordingly, the neXtProt knowledge database
(www.nextprot.org) updates its Protein Existence (PE) classification
every year.
2
In the latest update (2023–04–18),
90.23% of all proteins predicted by the human genome have undergone
empirical validation (mainly by mass spectrometry (MS) methodologies),
thus being designated as PE1 proteins (
n
= 18,397).
The absence of substantiated evidence at the protein level, however,
leaves a subset of proteins called missing proteins (MPs). The MPs
can be classified into three types: those with transcript evidence
(PE2,
n
= 1151), those based on homology (PE3,
n
= 215), and those predicted (PE4,
n
=
15). This lack of evidence may be due to factors such as low expression
levels, presence in transitory cell states, or expression restricted
to rare cells that are challenging to sample or only represent a small
proportion of the cells in a tissue. As a result, identifying the
cells and tissues in which these MPs are expressed poses a significant
challenge for revealing their identity and characteristics.
The Human Protein Atlas (HPA) is a comprehensive database that
systematically maps human protein expression across all major tissues
and cell types. Based on an integrated omics approach combining quantitative
information from transcriptomics with spatial information based on
stringent antibody-based imaging, the open-access database www.proteinatlas.org
constitutes an important resource for understanding human biology
and disease by untangling previously unknown patterns of protein localization,
distribution, and abundance. Due to its comprehensive coverage of
protein expression across diverse tissues and cells, the HPA will
be able to play a crucial role in the quest for MPs, providing a valuable
repository of data that can be used to identify and validate these
elusive proteins.
The ovary stands as one of the most dynamic
organs in humans, playing
a pivotal role in both the endocrine and reproductive systems.
3
During the reproductive years, spanning from
puberty to menopause, the ovary fulfills dual functions: hormone production
and the monthly release of a mature oocyte. The meiosis is initiated
already during fetal development and comes to halt at the diplotene
stage of prophase I. The meiotic progression remains suspended for
several years, until puberty. At this stage, the influence of pituitary
gonadotropins prompts the oocytes to reenter meiosis I, leading to
an intermediate phase, known as metaphase I. Ultimately, a dominant
oocyte will reach the metaphase II stage and can be ovulated. The
oocyte, surrounded by granulosa cells, shapes a unique and functional
structure: the follicle. The nongrowing follicles are situated within
the ovarian cortex, the ovary’s outer layer. As follicles grow,
they migrate into the medulla, the inner region of the ovary. Folliculogenesis
can reach completion solely after the onset of puberty, culminating
in ovulation, which is the release of the metaphase II oocyte. The
count of follicles is finite and dramatically declines from birth
to puberty, with only a handful proceeding through the entire folliculogenesis
process. For most follicles, the natural end is death through atresia.
Given the restricted number of follicles, their disparate distribution
throughout the tissue, the dynamic shift in cellular composition over
a woman’ life and menstrual cycle, and the inherent complexities
involved in obtaining appropriate ovarian samples (from healthy prepubertal
and reproductive-age women), the proteome of the immature oocyte remains
insufficiently comprehended.
In the standard HPA workflow, the
ovary is one of the tissue types
that have undergone profiling using both bulk mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq)
and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
4
Until
now, the transcriptomics data has been based on a consensus data set
consisting of samples sequenced as part of the HPA consortium as well
as data from samples collected within the GTEx consortium.
5
All HPA samples (
n
= 3) and
the majority of samples from the GTEx consortium (
n
= 107 out of 180) were from potential postmenopausal women (50–80
years old), resulting in an exceedingly rare number of follicles within
the analyzed samples. As a result, genes specifically expressed in
follicles often fell under the detection limit, posing challenges
in identifying novel not previously described proteins potentially
expressed in these rare cells. Last year, we published a case study
in which the HPA was used to validate the expression of seven MPs
in the human ovary.
6
This validation was
achieved by comparing data obtained through antibody-based proteomics
and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Out of these seven proteins,
two are no longer classified as MPs: MRO and ZNF793. As part of the
present investigation, four new RNA-seq samples of ovarian cortex
spanning ages of 7 to 32 have been sequenced and added to the HPA
data set, with the data accessible in the most recent version 23.0
of the HPA database, opening the doors to unique possibilities for
exploration of oocyte-specific proteins. Our study aims to identify
and validate MPs in the human ovary, with a specific focus on immature
follicles. Based on transcriptomics analysis of the four new tissue
samples representing both prepubertal girls and women of fertile age,
we have selected candidates for antibody-based profiling using the
same tissue samples, constituting a unique possibility of validating
tissue-specific expression patterns with different methodologies.
Finally, to confirm the cell type specificity, the results have been
compared with single-cell transcriptomics data and the novel candidates
were further analyzed using multiplexed immunofluorescence.
Experimental Procedure
Human Tissue Samples and Tissue Preparation
Frozen
ovarian cortex samples were collected from four individuals aged 7,
16, 20, and 32 years for fertility preservation and stored in liquid
nitrogen. The samples were anonymized, and no clinical information
except for the age was available. Samples were embedded in optimal
cutting temperature (OCT) compound for cryo-sectioning and RNA isolation
or fixed in fresh 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution for histology
and protein analysis overnight. Tissues were then dehydrated, starting
with 70% alcohol, and impregnated with paraffin in 60 °C using
a tissue embedding system (Tissue Processing Center TCP 15, MEDITE
Medical GmbH, Germany). The tissues were embedded in paraffin blocks
and routine 4 μm-thick microtome sections were cut, placed on
glass slides (SuperFrost Plus, Menzel-Glaser, Germany), and stored
at −20 °C. One control slide was stained with hematoxylin
and eosin for tissue quality control.
7
Furthermore,
to optimize IHC staining, an anonymized human ovarian cortex tissue
sample was obtained from a gender reassignment patient (30 years old)
at Karolinska University Hospital. A written and oral informed consent
form was signed by the patient in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki. The tissue was retrieved from the operating room and
transported to the research laboratory in PBS within 15 min. A portion
of the cortex was removed from the medulla and was fixed in formalin
and stored in paraffin. The project was approved by the Swedish ethical
review authority nos. 2917/2124-31/3, 2020-05940, 2015/798-31/2, and
2021-04563.
RNA Extraction and Sequencing
For total RNA isolation,
the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN N.V., Venlo, Netherlands) was used as
previously described.
4
In brief, up to
ten 15 μm sections were collected into a tube and lysed with
lysis buffer and beta-mercaptoethanol. The tissue was homogenized
mechanically with two metal beads and vortexed at maximum speed for
10–20 s. The solution was transferred to a spin column followed
by a series of centrifugations according to the manufacturer’s
description. RNA concentration was initially controlled with a NanoDrop
spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts),
and RNA integrity was analyzed by the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system
(Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, USA) with the RNA 6000 Nano LabChip
Kit. Only samples of high-quality RNA (RNA integrity number ≥7)
were sequenced. The samples were prepared with the TruSeq PolyA selection
kit and sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, California),
similarly as previously described.
8
Transcript-normalized
expression (“nTPM”) values for each protein-coding gene
and sample were obtained following the HPA-standardized data analysis
protocol as previously described.
4
The
data was based on The Human Protein Atlas version 23.0 and Ensembl
version 109.
Transcriptomics Data Analysis (Deconvolution)
To identify
the most suitable deconvolution method for our data set, we used the
R package “granulator” (
https://github.com/xanibas/granulator
), which enabled us to conduct benchmarking and estimate the proportions
of four ovarian cell types (oocytes, granulosa cells, endothelial
cells, and stromal cells) present in the four samples sequenced with
RNA-seq. A reference profile was created by downloading single-cell
type RNA-seq data from the HPA Web site v23.proteinatlas.org, processed
as described previously.
9
This data set
included the nTPM value for each gene across 81 distinct cell types
from 31 data sets. Subsequently, the cell types of interest—oocytes,
granulosa cells, endothelial cells, and ovarian stromal cells—were
selected from this data set. While the expression data for endothelial
cells stems from the integration of all “endothelial cell”
clusters across various data sets and tissues in the human body, those
for oocytes, granulosa cells, and ovarian stromal cells are directly
sourced and specific to the “ovary” data set (originally
published by Wagner et al.
3
). To aid in
benchmarking of the different deconvolution methods included in “granulator”,
we have also estimated the proportion of cell types in the four samples
by image analysis. Multiple deconvolution methods can also be evaluated
with this package. Cell types were estimated by first covering the
entire tissue area with squares at approximately 40,000 μm
2
for each square on H&E-stained sections. Representative
regions of interest (ROIs) with three main phenotypes—oocyte
and granulosa cell-rich, endothelial cell-rich, or general ovarian
stroma—were selected for each sample. QuPath Cell Detection
was used to count the total number of nuclei within each of the ROIs
and manually phenotype cells to estimate the percentages of oocytes,
granulosa cells, endothelial cells, and ovarian stroma cells. The
remaining squares were compared with the ROIs to extrapolate and estimate
the total number of cells and percentages of each cell type in the
entire sample (
Supplementary Figure 1
).
Based on the results of the benchmarking, “dtangle”
was identified as the most suitable method for deconvolution
10
and the estimated cell type proportions presented
in this study were derived from the application of this method.
IHC
Slides corresponding to one tissue section per
analyzed antibody were baked overnight in 50 °C, deparaffinized
in xylene, and rehydrated in graded alcohols (99.9, 95, and 80%) down
to deionized water. Endogenous peroxidases were blocked using 0.3%
hydrogen peroxide in 95% alcohol, and the heat-induced epitope retrieval
(HIER) was performed in a decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical, Walnut
Creek, California, USA) at 125 °C for 4 min while the slides
were immersed in 1× Target Retrieval Solution, pH 6.0 (Agilent
Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, California, USA). Slides were then
cooled to approximately 90 °C before rinsing with deionized water
and stored immersed in TBS+Tween wash buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
TA-999-TT, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). All antibody stainings were
performed at room temperature (RT) using the Autostainer 480S (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) and staining kits from Epredia (Epredia UltraVision
LP HRP kit and DAB Detection System, Breda, Netherlands) with HPA
standard IHC staining protocol previously described.
7
Primary antibodies and their dilution for the top candidates
are listed in
Table S2
. Then, the slides
were digitized using an Aperio AT2 slide scanner (Leica Biosystems,
Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany) with a 20× objective. Each digitized
tissue sample was manually annotated using the HPA Laboratory Information
Management System (LIMS), for each of the four cell types: oocytes,
granulosa cells, endothelial cells, and stromal cells. The principal
annotation parameter was staining intensity, which was based on the
following standardized HPA scale: not detected (or negative), weak,
moderate, and high.
4
In cases where the
cell type was not present in the whole tissue section, no conclusions
could be drawn regarding the protein expression and the parameter
“not set” was selected. For the final candidates, the
annotation results (intensity, quantity, localization, and the summary)
are available in
Table S3
. Ultimately,
one slide per sample per antibody was analyzed.
Multiplex Immunofluorescence (mIF)
Slides were pretreated
the same as described for IHC above. After HIER, the slides were exposed
to a LED-light bleaching process immersed in a bleaching solution
consisting of 0.2 M glycine, 1.5% hydrogen peroxide, and 1× TBS+Tween
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, TA-999-TT), for 1 h in RT.
Slides
were incubated using a fixed panel of five marker antibodies in a
six-cycle antibody staining process with intermediary deactivation
steps after each cycle in 90 °C for 20 min, immersed in 1×
Target Retrieval Solution, pH 6.0 (Agilent Technologies), using a
decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical) for antibody stripping. Full
cycle information (panel markers, antibodies, dilutions, reagents,
incubation times, OPAL fluorophores) is available in
Table S4
. One cycle of staining includes blocking, primary
antibody incubation, antirabbit IgG (H+L) with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) polymer, and an OPAL fluorophore (Akoya Biosciences, Marlborough,
Massachusetts, USA). All cycles were performed at RT and using the
Austostainer 480S (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the HRP kit from
Epredia (Epredia UltraVision LP HRP kit). After the last cycle, slides
were incubated with the OPAL 780 fluorophore-conjugated anti-DIG antibody
and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Invitrogen, D1306,
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Slides were then mounted using Prolong
Glass Antifade mounting medium and left to cure overnight in RT after
which they were digitized using PhenoImager (Akoya Biosciences). Spectral
unmixing and export of images were performed using the built-in spectral
library of the inForm software (Akoya Biosciences). Ultimately, a
single slide per sample was analyzed for the specified MPs.
R Session Information
All the data processing and visualization
were performed on R (version 4.2.2) and by using the following packages:
data.table (version 1.14.8), dplyr (version 1.1.2), forcats (version
1.0.0), ggh4x (version 0.2.5), ggplot2 (version 3.4.2), ggpubr (version
0.6.0), ggridges (version 0.5.4), granulator (version 1.6.0), gridExtra
(version 2.3), hrbrthemes (version 0.8.0), purr (version 1.0.1), readr
(version 2.1.4), readxl (version 1.4.3), stringr (version 1.5.0),
tibble (version 3.2.1), tidyr (version 1.3.0), tidyverse (version
2.0.0), viridis (version 0.6.4), and viridisLite (version 0.4.2).
Data Availability
The four new sequenced ovarian tissue
samples results are publicly available on the Protein Atlas version
23.0 (released 2023–06–19).
Results
Transcriptomic Analysis of Novel Ovary Samples
Fresh
frozen samples of ovarian cortex from four individuals (7, 16, 20,
and 32 years old) were sequenced, and the data was processed using
the same pipeline as the previous samples in the HPA database. The
new HPA ovary data set now consists of seven samples out of which
four were added as part of this study. Based on a normalization taking
into consideration also the GTEx ovary data set (180 individuals),
we were able to determine how many genes show an elevated expression
in the ovary from a body-wide perspective. Interestingly, with the
addition of the four new samples, 178 genes were elevated in the ovary
in comparison to 35 other normal organs, representing 57 newly elevated
genes compared to the previous data set, which is a striking number
considering that the classification is based on the average expression
in the ovary taking into account all the other HPA and GTEx samples.
Among the newly elevated genes are, e.g., ZP3, ZP4, and FIGLA (oocyte
markers), INSL3 (theca cells), and SERPINE2 (granulosa cells). This
suggests that addition of the four new samples adds important insights
on genes and proteins relevant for ovarian function. This was also
confirmed by comparing the expression levels of these genes between
the old and new data sets, where it is evident that genes associated
with follicular cells show a significantly higher expression in the
new data set (
Figure
1
a). SERPINE2 is also expressed by stromal cells, which contributes
to the less pronounced difference in expression between the new and
old data (
Figure
1
).
The data also shows interindividual differences between the four new
samples, with consistently lower expression levels of oocyte and granulosa
cell-specific genes in the sample from the 32-year-old woman, indicating
that this sample contains a smaller proportion of follicles (
Figure
1
b). Nevertheless,
the expression levels of oocyte and granulosa cell-specific genes
in this sample were higher than in samples from older women; thus,
all four samples were therefore included in the present investigation.
Figure 1
Log-normalized
transcriptomic expression of genes newly identified
as elevated in the ovary. These genes include well-known markers for
oocytes (ZP3, ZP4, and FIGLA), theca cells (INSL3), and (SERPINE2).
(A) A comparison between the prior version of the Human Protein Atlas
(HPA) data set (v22—shown in black) and the latest version
(v23—shown in purple). The visualization displays the average
expression (log(nTPM+1)) across all individual samples in both HPA
(v22,
n
= 3; v23,
n
= 7) and GTEx
(
n
= 180), alongside the consensus value. (B) Expression
values (log(nTPM+1)) across HPA samples (
n
= 7).
Among these, the four youngest samples (ages: 7, 16, 20, and 32) were
newly added in v23 of the HPA database, while the other three (ages
52, 64, and 80) were present in previous HPA versions.
Estimations of Cell Type Proportions in Ovarian Samples Based
on Deconvolution and Image Analysis
Since bulk RNA-seq data
is obtained from heterogeneous tissue samples with variable cellular
compositions that may constrain analysis, we next aimed to estimate
the proportion of cell types present in the samples used for RNA-seq.
In recent years, many computational approaches have been developed
to estimate cellular proportions in bulk RNA-seq data, such as deconvolution.
By using a reference data set of single-cell expression profiles from
women of reproductive age presented in the HPA database, we benchmarked
different methods for deconvolution and created a framework for analysis
of our four novel samples. The results from the deconvolution of the
bulk RNA-seq data are presented in
Figure
2
, along with estimated cell type proportions
generated by automated image analysis. In this study, we focused on
four main cell types (oocytes, granulosa cells, epithelial cells,
and stromal cells) while excluding others such as immune cells. The
estimations of the cell type proportions appear to be overestimated
within the deconvolution framework but underestimated through image
analysis-based estimation (
Supplementary Figure 1
). It should be noted that tissues are not composed of a fixed
and predetermined number of distinct cell types and cell types can
display variations and subtypes that may not be adequately captured
by either of the methods employed. Reference profiles based on single-cell
transcriptomics data could not encompass the diverse stages of follicle
development, including primordial and primary stages. On the other
hand, image analysis-based estimation was performed on a single section
from the same sample used for bulk RNA-seq analysis. While this approach
offers insights into tissue quality and morphology, it may not accurately
reflect the actual number of sequenced cells, thus lacking full representativeness.
Figure 2
Estimation
of the ovarian cell proportions (in percentage) utilizing
automated image analysis (left panel) and bulk-RNA-seq data deconvolution
(right panel) for the four youngest patients (ages: 7, 16, 20, and
32). One slide per patient was employed for automated image analysis.
The analysis focused on four primary cell types: oocytes (vivid pink),
granulosa cells (light lavender), epithelial cells (antique ruby),
and stromal cells (slate gray).
The proportion of oocytes found in the ovarian
cortex across our
four samples varied between 2 and 5% when estimated based on deconvolution
and between 0.004 and 0.121% when estimated through image analysis
(
Figure
2
). This is
consistent with data previously described by Wagner et al.,
3
the adult ovary data set used as a reference
profile, which suggested a very low proportion of oocytes (0.2%).
The highest proportion was consistently observed in the sample from
the 7-year-old individual, the youngest among the samples (
Figure
2
). Nevertheless,
all results lead to the same overall conclusion: the predominant component
in the ovarian tissue samples remains the stromal cells, succeeded
by endothelial cells, granulosa cells, and finally, oocytes, further
highlighting the necessity of corroborating transcriptomics findings
through spatial protein expression profiling.
Target Genes and Candidate Selection
Next, we aimed
to identify MP candidates suitable for an extensive spatial analysis
in the four new tissue samples. Based on the most recent neXtProt
update (2023–04–18), a total of 1381 proteins are still
categorized as MPs, delineated into 1151 PE2, 215 PE3, and 15 PE4.
Out of these 1381 MPs, 269 MPs (248 PE2 and 21 PE3) have antibody
data published in the most recent version of the HPA database, excluding
antibodies targeting sequences with high homology toward other human
proteins (multitargeting antibodies). To identify protein candidates
potentially expressed in follicles, we generated a new data set of
transcriptomics levels only in the four new samples. Based on the
same filtration process as our previous study
6
using an expression threshold of 0.5 nTPM in at least one of the
four samples, a total of 14,367 out of the 20,162 genes remained.
Among these 14,367 genes, 61 out of the 269 MPs with antibodies available
in the HPA remained (detailed in
Table S1
), all classified as PE2. Out of the initial 61 candidates, 16 were
excluded based on a thorough manual screening of the HPA database.
Unfortunately, TTLL3, which has been described and validated previously,
was excluded due to low antibody volume. Additionally, SEM1, which
possesses two distinct identifiers in UniProt/neXtProt, one PE1 and
the other PE2, was also excluded since it is not possible to determine
which of these two proteins is targeted by the antibody.
6
Fourteen additional proteins were excluded taking
into consideration available antibody volume and staining pattern
in the ovary, e.g., lack of staining in follicles in present samples
available in the HPA database, or unspecific antibody staining. Finally,
45 MPs were stained and optimized with IHC on a large section of ovarian
cortex containing a significant number of follicles, out of which
20 final candidates (AGBL3, C6orf52, CTXN1, EBLN2, GPR27, GPR63, H1–8,
LEKR1, METTL24, PGPEP1L, RERGL, TAS1R1, TMEM235, TRIM61, TRIM73, XNDC1N,
ZNF582, ZNF626, ZNF677, and ZNF891) yielded distinct staining in follicles
and were selected for in-depth IHC analysis. The mRNA expression levels
of these 20 candidates are displayed in
Figure
3
. Compared with our prior publication,
6
this study identified 35 MPs with available antibodies
that were unidentified in last year’s study. Ten of these were
stained in the present investigation (AGBL3, GPR27, H1–8, PGPEP1L,
TAS1R1, TMEM235, XNDC1N, ZNF626, ZNF677, and ZNF891), while the remaining
25 were not selected due to suboptimal staining pattern during screening
or IHC optimization. Twenty-six proteins were present in both the
previous and this data set, out of which 10 were analyzed as part
of this study (C6orf52, CTXN1, EBLN2, GPR63, LEKR1, METTL24, RERGL,
TRIM61, TRIM73, and ZNF582). A total of 16 proteins were exclusively
present in the previous paper. Seven of them are no longer classified
as MPs (C11orf53, C1orf54, CYB5RL, FAM110D, MRO, RGL4, and ZNF793),
six are incompletely described (ALG1L, C12orf76, QRFP, STRC, ZBED6CL,
and ZNF781), and three do not meet the expression cutoff criteria
in our new sample assessment (ANKRD61, KIF25, and PROX2).
Figure 3
Log-normalized
transcriptomic expression (log(nTPM+1)) of the 20
candidate MPs across the four samples, each representing one patient
(ages: 7, 16, 20, and 32).
Protein Profiling of MPs in the Ovary
The 20 final
candidates were stained with IHC on samples from the four new individuals
used for RNA-seq analysis (antibody information available in
Table S2
), and the staining patterns were annotated
manually (data shown in
Table S3
). Representative
IHC images and an overview of the staining intensity across four ovarian
cell types (oocytes, granulosa cells, endothelial cells, and stroma)
are displayed in
Figure
4
, showing that the positivity observed in follicle cells in the test
staining could be reproduced also in these novel samples for all 20
candidates. Ten of the analyzed proteins showed stronger expression
in oocytes (C6orf52, EBLN2, H1–8, LEKR1, MELTTL24, PGPEP1L,
TMEM235, ZNF582, ZNF626, and ZNF677), two were more highly expressed
in granulosa cells (CTXN1 and TRIM73), and eight proteins showed staining
of equal intensity in both oocytes and granulosa cells (AGBL3, GPR27,
GPR63, RERGL, TAS1R1, TRIM61, XNDC1N, and ZNF891). While certain proteins
appeared to be highly specific to follicle cells (EBLN2, H1–8,
LEKR1, METTL24, PGPEPL1, TRIM73, and ZNF582), many proteins exhibited
additional staining in endothelial cells (CTXN1, TA1SR1, TMEM235,
XNDC1N), stromal cells (AGBL3, ZNF626), or both (C6orf52, GPR27, GPR63,
RERGL, TRIM61, ZNF677, and ZNF891). Based on the IHC analysis alone,
we cannot rule out whether positivity observed in endothelial cells
and stromal cells represents true protein expression or nonspecific
antibody binding.
Figure 4
Protein profiling of the 20 candidate MPs in novel ovarian
samples.
(A) Representative images of IHC staining patterns of the 20 candidate
MPs in human ovarian tissue from a 7-year-old individual. Brown staining
corresponds to antibody binding, and all nuclei are stained with hematoxylin
in blue as counterstaining. One whole tissue slide per patient (
n
= 4, ages: 7, 16, 20, and 32) per antibody (
n
= 20) was analyzed. (B) Overview of protein expression levels based
on IHC staining intensity, as well as transcriptomics levels based
on scRNa-seq from the HPA, originally from Wagner et al. Expression
levels are shown in four cell types: (oocytes (vivid pink), granulosa
cells (light lavender), epithelial cells (antique ruby), and stromal
cells (slate gray)). Dot sizes correspond to staining intensity or
scaled expression levels (log(nTPM+1)), while a cross indicates the
absence of the cell type on the analyzed slide.
Orthogonal Validation of MPs Based on Single-Cell Transcriptomics
For orthogonal validation of the single-cell type expression patterns
observed by IHC, we plotted the single-cell RNA expression levels
of the 20 candidates using the reference profile from the deconvolution
analysis (i.e., processed data from the HPA database, originated from
Wagner et al.
3
(
Figure
4
B). The analysis showed that for 14 genes
(70%), similar expression profiles in the four cell types were observed
using both IHC and scRNa-seq. Three genes were highly specific to
follicle cells using both IHC and scRNA-seq: H1–8 and PGPEP1L
expressed in oocytes and TRIM73 expressed in granulosa cells. Two
genes (C6orf52 and TMEM235) showed an elevated expression in oocytes
in both data sets but were more specific in the scRNA-seq data set,
suggesting nonspecific antibody binding to endothelial and/or stromal
cells. For nine genes (AGBL3, CTXN1, GPR27, GPR63, RERGL, TRIM61,
ZNF626, ZNF677, and ZNF891), expression in either oocytes, granulosa
cells, or both could be confirmed by IHC and scRNA-seq, but both methods
also showed additional expression in endothelial and/or stromal cells,
suggesting that these proteins are indeed expressed in multiple cell
types within the ovary. Finally, six genes displayed discordant mRNA
and protein expression patterns (EBLN2, LEKR1, METTL24, TAS1R1, XNDC1N,
and ZNF582). In these cases, the IHC staining showed highest expression
in either oocytes (EBLN2, LEKR1, METTL24, and ZNF582) or both oocytes
and granulosa cells (TAS1R1 and XNDC1N), while the expression based
on scRNA-seq was either low in general or more highly expressed in
endothelial and/or stromal cells. This discrepancy may be attributed
to the influence of age on expression levels, as certain proteins
exhibit highly specific expression in the youngest samples, corresponding
to immature follicles and oocytes. Consequently, the validation of
their expression using scRNA-seq data from adult individuals becomes
challenging, hindering conclusive interpretations for these proteins.
Validation of MPs Based on Multiplex Antibody-Based Imaging
While regular IHC constitutes a standard method for antibody-based
proteomics, staining patterns in small subsets of cells may be challenging
to determine by the human eye, and variations in staining intensity
between cell types may be misinterpreted due to saturation of the
staining. To establish a complementary antibody-based technology that
may aid in interpretation and further validate the cell type-specific
expression, four MP candidates with various technological challenges
identified both in the previous
6
and current
studies (GPR63, TRIM61, TRIM73 and ZNF582) were selected for mIF imaging.
A panel of five well-known markers targeting various cell types and
structures within ovarian tissue was used for comparison with expression
patterns of the selected MPs: ZP2, ALOX15B, and STAG3 for oocytes,
INHA for granulosa cells, and COL15A for endothelial and stromal cells.
The panel of five markers was stained together with the four selected
MPs, one by one, based on a 6-plex immunofluorescence strategy, together
with DAPI for outlining the nuclei. Unfortunately, the granulosa cell
marker INHA failed when stained together with GPR63, TRIM61, and ZNF582.
Representative immunofluorescence images are displayed in
Figure
5
.
Figure 5
Representative images
of multiplex immunofluorescence staining
patterns of four selected MPs (GPR63, TRIM61, TRIM73, ZNF582) visualized
in green, stained one by one together with a fixed panel of cell type-specific
markers targeting follicle cell cytoplasm (ALOX15B, red), follicle
cell nucleus (STAG3, white), granulosa cells (INHA, cyan), zona pellucida
(ZP, yellow), endothelial and stromal cells (COL15A1, magenta), and
a nuclear marker (DAPI, blue). The showcased images are derived from
a single patient (age: 7).
GPR63 showed concordant results between IHC and
scRNA-seq in follicle
cells, along with substantial staining in endothelial and stromal
cells using IHC. Immunofluorescence could have allowed for the mitigation
of this effect due to a higher signal-to-noise ratio, but in this
instance, the same result was obtained with both staining methods.
Concerning TRIM61, oocytes and granulosa cells showed equivalent expression
levels in the IHC analysis while scRNA-seq data pointed toward a slightly
higher expression in oocytes. The multiplex experiment allowed us
to refine the expression profile of this protein to be more highly
expressed in oocytes. TRIM73 had been selected for multiplex analysis
with the purpose of confirming its specific expression within granulosa
cells. The IHC and RNA results had already yielded compelling evidence,
yet the multiplex analysis enabled the specificity of this protein
to be confirmed through the application of an alternative antibody-based
methodology. IHC results for ZNF582 pointed toward a highly specific
expression in oocytes, while the scRNA-seq data was more diffuse.
The multiplex analysis confirmed the oocyte-specific expression observed
by IHC.
Discussion
The ovary constitutes a challenging tissue
type in large-scale
omics studies due to several reasons. The dynamic and complex biological
processes involving maturation of oocytes not only affect gene and
protein expression patterns throughout the menstrual cycle and during
the life-span of a woman, but some events also take place already
during fetal development. Access to representative tissue samples
from healthy individuals with intact follicles remains a significant
obstacle, and even if such samples are available, follicle cells only
correspond to a small proportion of the cells in the tissue, making
them difficult to analyze. Furthermore, as both the cell morphology
and gene expression of the follicles vary with age and hormonal factors,
studies based on a few samples will not be able to give a full understanding
of the molecular repertoire of human follicle cells. Previous studies
on ovary are underrepresented in the quest for MPs,
6
a set of proteins that lack previous evidence of existence
at the protein level as defined by the HPP consortium.
1
Here, we used a unique collection of ovarian samples from
both prepubertal girls and women of fertile age to investigate if
any of the 1381 proteins defined as MPs could be confidently identified
in human follicles.
In the present investigation, we took advantage
of the extensive
transcriptomics and antibody-based proteomics data sets publicly available
in the HPA database, both to identify suitable candidates for IHC
analysis by screening already validated antibodies and stained images
of the human ovary, and to validate the newly generated data. Out
of 269 genes with available antibody data in HPA v23, 61 genes showed
expression in at least one of the four new ovary samples based on
bulk RNA-seq, and 20 were finally selected for in-depth spatial proteomics
analysis using antibody-based imaging.
It is reassuring that
all 20 analyzed proteins exhibited distinct
staining in either oocytes, granulosa cells, or both using the new
samples, and as many as 14 proteins (70%) showed consistent results
at the single-cell type level when compared with data from scRNA-seq,
thereby suggesting that these 14 proteins (AGBL3, C6orf52, CTXN1,
GPR27, GPR63, H1–8, PGPEP1L, RERGL, TMEM235, TRIM61, TRIM73,
ZNF626, ZNF677, and ZNF891) are indeed expressed in human ovarian
tissue. Three proteins are particularly interesting as they based
on both IHC and scRNA-seq showing an elevated expression in either
oocytes (H1–8 and PGPEP1L) or granulosa cells (TRIM73), together
with very low or absent expression in surrounding endothelial or stroma
cells.
H1–8, also known as H1FOO, regulates gene expression
by
influencing the arrangement of chromatin structures and has previously
been identified through rt-PCR in human oocytes in 2003,
12
suggesting a role in oogenesis and early embryogenesis.
In 2022, a study affirmed the involvement of H1–8 in regulating
oogenesis in mice.
13
Another research group,
however, suggested that H1–8 may not be essential for mouse
oogenesis and fertility.
14
It has been
established that H1–8 is necessary for bovine subjects during
the preimplantation stage.
15
More recently,
a review concluded that H1–8 is activated during the germinal
vesicle stage, effectively replacing core histone H1 until the oocyte
reaches full maturity (MII) in mice.
16
A
study published in 2023
17
demonstrated
a correlation between H1–8 expression and oocyte maturity in
humans. Until now, its presence at the protein level has not yet been
confirmed, but here we present for the first time convincing evidence
of existence for H1–8 protein expression in human oocytes.
PGPEP1L, the second protein with robust expression restricted to oocytes
confirmed by the scRNA-seq data, is an enzyme predicted to be involved
in proteolysis. No previous study has described PGPEP1L in relation
to the ovary, but interestingly, PGPEP1L also shows expression in
human testis in the HPA database both using IHC and bulk RNA-seq,
suggesting a function related to reproduction. Here, we confidently
show that PGPEP1L is expressed in oocytes. TRIM73, which showed an
elevated expression in granulosa cells confirmed by both IHC and scRNA-seq,
has not been previously described in relation to normal human tissues
except for in our previous study.
6
Since
this protein was identified in granulosa cells using two different
strategies for candidate selection and the analysis was performed
on different samples, we believe that TRIM73 plays a role in granulosa
cells of the human ovary. To further support our findings, the same
results were obtained based on mIF, confirming overlap with the granulosa
cell-specific marker INHA.
Two proteins (C6orf52 and TMEM235)
that showed an elevated expression
in oocytes with both data sets but were more specific in the scRNA-seq
data set should be further validated by additional experiments in
order to confirm their oocyte specificity at the protein level. It
is possible that the additional positivity to endothelial and/or stromal
cells is caused by nonspecific antibody binding, which can be ruled
out by testing other antibodies toward the same proteins, or analyzing
these targets by other methods. It should also be noted that IHC analysis
is only semiquantitative and the staining becomes saturated, which
may suggest that the difference in protein expression levels between
oocytes and other surrounding cells is larger than reflected by differences
in staining intensity. Nevertheless, both IHC and scRNA-seq suggest
that these two proteins are expressed in human oocytes, and except
for C6orf52 also being identified in our previous study, neither of
these proteins have previously been described in human tissues or
in the context of ovary.
Nine proteins (AGBL3, CTXN1, GPR27,
GPR63, RERGL, TRIM61, ZNF626,
ZNF677, and ZNF891) showed expression in follicle cells according
to IHC and scRNA-seq, but both methods also showed additional expression
in endothelial and/or stromal cells. Four of these proteins (CTXN1,
GPR63, RERGL, and TRIM61) were identified also in our previous study,
suggesting a potential role in the human ovary, and interestingly,
two have previously been linked to reproductive function in the literature.
GPR63 has been associated with egg production in ducks,
18
and the response of the RERGL gene was altered
in irradiated perch gonads.
19
While the
staining of nine proteins was not restricted to oocytes or granulosa
cells only, all these candidates were distinctly expressed in follicle
cells based on both methods and it is still possible that these proteins
possess ovary-specific functions despite lower levels of expression
being observed in other surrounding cell types. The large proportion
of endothelial and stromal cells in the human ovary plays important
roles in supporting oogenesis, and further studies are needed to confirm
the roles of these nine proteins in human ovary in relation to their
cell type-specific functions.
The six proteins that displayed
discordant mRNA and protein expression
patterns (EBLN2, LEKR1, METTL24, TAS1R1, XNDC1N, and ZNF582) should
be further validated with orthogonal methods in order to confirm the
presence in follicle cells. In addition to challenges based on different
age and reproductive status of the samples, variations between mRNA
and protein levels could be caused by several factors, including mixed
cell clusters in the scRNA-seq data sets or low levels of gene expression
in a limited number of cells. It should also be noted that endothelial
cell cluster expression levels are merged from various data sets and
tissue types in the human body, potentially influencing the results.
Interestingly, TAS1R1, also known as Taste 1 Receptor Member 1, displayed
pronounced expression in the follicles of the two younger samples
(7 and 16 years old), suggesting a potential age-related difference.
TAS1R1 has been documented in mammalian spermatozoa but not in oocytes,
20
and an extended analysis of this MP in relation
to reproductive age is of particular interest. Four of the proteins
expressed in follicle cells that could not be confirmed by scRNA-seq
(EBLN2, LEKR1, METTL24, and ZNF582) were identified also in our previous
study. It is noteworthy that genetic variants of LEKR1 have been linked
to low birth weight
21
,
22
as well as epithelial ovarian
cancer,
23
highlighting this protein as
an immensely intriguing candidate warranting further comprehensive
investigations.
A limitation with affinity-based proteomics
is the access to validated
binders, further stressing the need for orthogonal validation. Here,
we used antibodies previously validated and optimized within the HPA
consortium based on stringent criteria. Since access to representative
ovarian samples has been limited in previous experiments using these
antibodies, it is however possible that some antibodies may yield
nonspecific staining and could be optimized further, or replaced by
a more specific antibody. One possibility to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio is the use of immunofluorescence. Immunofluorescence also has
the advantage of giving the possibility to stain multiple protein
targets in the same tissue section, allowing for comparison of the
staining patterns with other cell type-specific markers, a strategy
that can aid in interpretation of challenging staining patterns. In
the present investigation, we utilized this strategy for four proteins
(GPR63, TRIM61, TRIM73, and ZNF582) in order to determine if the results
observed by IHC could be reproduced by another methodology with the
same antibodies but also to investigate if immunofluorescence could
improve the specificity. The high consistency between the results
generated by IHC and mIF together with more distinct staining observed
with immunofluorescence for one of the candidates (TRIM61) suggest
that this method could be an important complement to standard IHC
in future antibody-based studies analyzing MPs.
Here, we identified
20 MPs expressed in the human ovary and performed
an in-depth analysis in four samples corresponding to prepubertal
girls and women of fertile age to confirm the expression of these
MPs using bulk RNA-seq and IHC of the same tissue samples. The single-cell
type-specific expression pattern of 14 proteins could be confirmed
by an orthogonal scRNA-seq data set. In spite of the limited characterization
of these proteins, we found striking concordance between our results
and those derived from transcriptomic analysis. This notable alignment
significantly bolsters the credibility and substantiates the validation
of these proteins, and we therefore suggest that the data presented
here should be sufficient to upgrade the evidence of these proteins
to PE1. Both these 14 proteins and the other 6 analyzed proteins constitute
interesting targets for further analysis in the context of human ovary
using additional samples spanning different stages of the woman’s
age, as well as validation with other orthogonal methods, e.g., quantitative
methods for protein detection such as mass spectrometry, or spatial
transcriptomics analysis.
It should be noted that both sample
size and the associated metadata
in the present study were limited, potentially affecting the generalizability
of our findings. Given that the patients underwent fertility preservation
protocols, it is conceivable that they had a history of cancer or
other serious illness conditions and potentially underwent treatments
prior to ovarian tissue retrieval. While incorporating these data
into the HPA database has yielded a valuable enhancement, notably
by augmenting follicle counts, it is imperative to underscore this
significant limitation. Moreover, due to the scarcity of cells of
interest, our analysis in this regard might be constrained. Nevertheless,
despite these limitations, our study contributes significantly to
the characterization of these proteins in the human ovary and offers
promising avenues for future research in the quest of both MPs and
further understanding of human reproduction. The transcriptomics data
from the four new individuals is publicly available in the HPA database,
enabling discovery of new ovary-specific candidates not previously
analyzed on the protein level.
While the transition from “Missing
Protein” to “PE1″
is well defined and adheres to specific criteria for MS methods,
1
this is not as clearly established for other
approaches, such as those based on antibodies. Antibody-based methods
rely on the specificity of binding between antibodies and target proteins,
but challenges remain in rigorously validating antibodies and ensuring
consistency across results obtained from different techniques. While
efforts are made to select highly specific and validated antibodies
(as in HPA), the complexity of protein–antibody interactions,
variations in antibody affinity and sensitivity, and the diversity
of tissues and experimental conditions render antibody-based analysis
more prone to ambiguities.
Nevertheless, antibody-based approaches
provide the ability to
confirm protein localization with a spatial resolution, particularly
valuable in tissues where some cells are exceedingly rare, as in this
case oocytes. It would appear reasonable that MPs identified through
antibody-based proteomics, with confirmation at the transcript level
(scRNA), should no longer be classified as MPs. Furthermore, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of this approach in identifying the tissues and
cell types where missing proteins could be discovered. As a result,
these promising candidates could be validated through orthogonal methods,
such as targeted mass spectrometry, at the level of specific tissues,
even at distinct stages (such as age-related stages in the case of
the ovary).