Introduction
Information about the higher-order structure
of proteins is vital
for our understanding of their function. Mass spectrometry-based methods
offer a wide range of approaches to study protein structure,
1
interactions,
2
and
dynamics.
3
One of these approaches is the
covalent labeling of proteins. Covalent labeling might be implemented
by different means. For example, the common technique hydrogen/deuterium
exchange (HDX) relies on the exchange of amide hydrogens on the backbone
of the protein.
4
The efficiency of this
method of labeling is based on solvent accessibility and the local
hydrogen bonding network. HDX already has a well-established workflow
and numerous data analysis software packages.
5
−
8
Other methods of protein footprinting
use reactive radical species such as fluoroalkyl radicals,
9
,
10
carbonate radical,
11
carbene diradical,
12
and hydroxyl radical.
13
Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Proteins (FPOP) employs labeling
of amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals.
13
The covalent modification of the residues is irreversible.
Moreover, the
•
OH properties are similar to those
of the H
2
O molecules, offering a biologically relevant
image of the protein state.
14
The nonspecific
nature of this reaction offers theoretically no limit in coverage,
but in practice, the difference in reactivity between the amino acid
side chains and the
•
OH varies by 10
3
,
14
,
15
resulting in the predominance of more reactive
residue modifications (Cys, Met, Trp, Tyr, Phe, His) over less reactive
(aliphatic and other polar) amino acids.
14
Therefore, the extent of modification is not proportional to just
the solvent accessibility but depends on the side chain reactivity
as well. Furthermore, high confidence in the modification position
is necessary for reliable and relevant results. While FPOP continues
to develop, most recently via a top-down proteomic approach,
16
,
17
the bottom-up approach is most commonly used.
18
,
19
Currently, FPOP analysis is held back by tedious data processing,
and the workflow has not yet been unified like in the case of HDX.
A recent protocol by Liu et al.
20
introduces
guidelines to establish an FPOP platform but is limited in the number
of modifications used and relies on Byos (Protein Metrics, CA, USA),
which includes the FPOP workflow as part of the suite and cannot be
obtained separately. One of the other proprietary programs used for
FPOP data analysis is Sequest, but it is restricted in the number
of possible modifications, thus requiring separate consecutive searches.
21
The recently introduced algorithm update for
cloud-based search engine Bolt promises an increased number of modifications
while decreasing the processing time
22
but
so far lacks adaptation. There are two open source programs that might
be used for FPOP data processing: MSS-clean
23
and PepFoot.
24
Their primary designation
is footprinting experiments with a specific covalent probe, thus being
able to run analysis with only one variable mass shift at a time.
MSFragger,
25
Comet,
26
and MS-GF+
27
are standard open
source proteomic search engines that allow enough variable modifications
to be suitable for FPOP, but they require employment of further processing
modules to provide certainty assessment for the modification site.
The steps of FPOP data processing involve a database search, identification
of the compounds from the MS/MS spectra, assignment of chromatographic
peaks, and quantification of the signal intensity from the LC chromatogram.
As previously published,
28
the choice of
search engine can significantly influence the identification of modified
peptides in a data set. We decided to explore this aspect of data
processing for FPOP analyses. Two representatives of different algorithmic
approaches were chosen for this experiment: Mascot,
29
as a purely database search-based software, and PEAKS,
30
which employs
de novo
sequencing
as a workflow improvement. Mascot searches the MS/MS data provided
in the form of a peak list against a database of choice. Each peptide-spectrum
match (PSM) is assigned a score based on the probability that the
observed match is a random event. Confidence in the localization of
the peptide modification is expressed as a percentage value derived
from the difference in score between the two most probable sites.
31
The number of variable modifications that can
be defined for a search is limited to 9. PEAKS accepts raw analysis
files from a variety of vendors (Agilent, Bruker, Thermo, and Waters)
and runs its own data refinement. In pursuit of more reliable identification,
PEAKS performs additive merging of spectra based on the precursor
m
/
z
and time window. Furthermore, it combines
de novo
and database search results together with additional
features as an input for the internal Linear Discrimination Function
to derive the
p
-value and ultimately score.
30
Modification localization is reported as an
AScore, reflecting the probability of the reported position compared
to all other possible positions. There is no limit to the number of
variable modifications defined for the PEAKS search.
For the
evaluation of search engine performance, an FPOP hemoglobin–haptoglobin
data set from an experiment previously performed in our lab
32
,
33
was selected for the study. The data set is available on ProteomeXchange
34
(PXD021621). It represents a complex proteomic
sample with features such as disulfide bonds and glycosylations, which
must be taken into account during the sample treatment.
35
Steps such as carbamidomethylation of Cys and
deglycosylation alter the peptide features and increase the complexity
of the sample, raising the bar for search engines.
Methods
Data Analysis
Data were searched against a database
consisting of sequences of Hb (Uniprot IDs
P69905
and
P68871
) and
Hp (Uniprot ID
P00738
) supplemented with a deglycosylated form of
β subunit, together with 246 sequences of common contaminants
(including trypsin and catalase), using Mascot Server 2.7.0 software
(Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) and PEAKS Studio X+ software
(Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). The MGF files
for Mascot were generated in Compass DataAnalysis v.5.3 (Bruker Daltonics,
Billerice, MA, USA). The database was infused with reverse sequence
decoys. Only tryptic peptides with up to two misscleavages were allowed.
The tolerance of the precursor ions was set at 12 ppm, and the mass
tolerance for the MS/MS fragment ions was set at 0.05 Da. The significance
threshold was set to
p
≤ 0.05. The considered
variable modifications are listed in
Table S1
. Only peptides with a single FPOP modification were considered for
the analysis. This condition was applied because the FPOP modifications
might alter the protein’s structure, which could make solvent
accessible areas that are not present in the native state of the protein.
Peptide-spectrum matches were cut off by default values: −10log
10
(
P
) ≥ 2 for Mascot and −10log
10
(
P
) ≥ 15 for PEAKS. The intensities
of the peptides were determined using Compass DataAnalysis v.5.3.
Due to the fact that Mascot’s results were obtained as a list
of all identifications, the modified peptides with multiple IDs were
clustered in a 30 s retention time window, from which the best scoring
ID was selected.
The intersections of the modifications detected
within the replicates
and between the Mascot and PEAKS results were visualized using Venn
diagrams using the “matplotlib_venn”
36
Python package.
The results were subjected to Principal
Component Analysis (PCA),
where the parameters evaluated were score, site probability (MD-score
for Mascot and AScore for PEAKS), and precursor intensity. For the
purpose of linearization, log
10
(AScore) was used for the
PEAKS results. The PCA and subsequent visualization of the results
have been carried out in R
37
using the
“FactoMineR”,
38
“factoextra”,
39
and “corrplot”
40
packages.
Results and Discussion
Modifications Detected
within Replicates
Using Mascot
and PEAKS, a peptide search was done separately for each replicate.
The resulting lists of IDs only partially overlapped (
Figure S1
). In the hemoglobin (Hb) sample, Mascot
identified a total of 603 modified peptides with 154 IDs being mutual
for all three replicates (
Table
1
). In the haptoglobin (Hp) sample, a total of 407 modified
peptides were identified, of which 107 were mutual. In the hemoglobin–haptoglobin
(HbHp) complex sample, 1148 modified peptides were identified, of
which 309 were mutual. As for PEAKS, the search of the Hb sample yielded
a total of 588 modified peptides, of which 119 were mutual for all
three replicates. For the Hp sample, 525 modified peptides were identified,
of which 114 were mutual. In the sample of the HbHp complex, a total
of 1216 modified peptides were identified, with 277 of them being
mutual.
Table 1
Modified Peptides in Hb, Hp, and HbHp
Complex Samples Identified by Mascot and PEAKS
Mascot
PEAKS
all
mutual
all
mutual
Hb
603
154
25.5%
588
119
20.2%
Hp
407
107
26.3%
525
114
21.7%
HbHp
1148
309
26.9%
1216
277
22.8%
The portion of mutual
IDs to the total amount of IDs
was higher
in the case of Mascot, around 26%, in contrast to PEAKS, which averaged
around 22%. This shows a higher consistency in the identification
of modified peptides by Mascot. The Mascot results include occurrences
of the same modified peptide (meaning type and position) from different
retention times. This proves to be interesting, especially for encompassing
all possible variants of modified peptides, which could reside on
different atoms of the amino acid side chain, resulting in elution
of
the same peptide at multiple retention times (isobaric forms of modifications).
41
For further evaluation, only IDs detected
in all three replicates
were accepted.
Intersection between Mascot and PEAKS
Considering only
modified peptides identified in all 3 replicates, a comparison between
Mascot and PEAKS was made. Matching IDs possessed the same type, site
of modification, and retention time. Only a limited number of identified
modified peptides were shared among search engines (
Figure
1
). It is worth noting that
the proportion of mutual IDs remains the same for analyses of single
peptides as well as for the HbHp complex. This suggests that the IDs
done by search engines are not related to the complexity of the data
set but to the logic of identification.
Figure 1
Intersections (orange)
of IDs by Mascot (red) and PEAKS (green)
in the (A) hemoglobin sample, (B) haptoglobin sample, and (C) HbHp
complex sample.
The observed mutual exclusivity
might be explained
to some extent
due to the Mascot search engine being limited in the number of possible
defined variable modifications to 9. Based on our prior evaluation
of the current data set,
32
,
33
together with previously
published data processing setups
20
and
described rates of reactivity,
14
,
15
the His → Asn,
His → Asp, and trioxidation modifications were defined for
the PEAKS search only (
Table S1
). His already
has 4 different modifications defined, and we were more interested
in Met −32 Da, as a modification of the most reactive residue.
Arg deguanidination was included for both search engines to widen
the spatial resolution of the method. Trioxidation was not used in
Mascot, because it is an extensive modification occurring mainly on
Cys that requires the reaction of 3 radicals,
15
reducing the relevance for structural information. Moreover, the
inclusion of positional isomers in the Mascot results (mentioned above)
further increases the number of unique IDs. The modifications, which
were defined only in PEAKS searches, make up around one-third of the
exclusive IDs. The setup of a PEAKS search with the same set of modifications
as Mascot was tested, but the number of mutual IDs did not increase.
Another reason for the differences in IDs could originate from fragmentation
spectra, where the ions do not cover the exact position of the modification,
and the precise position cannot be determined. In these cases, each
of the search engines could tend to a different localization of the
modification. Lastly, the results suggest that the search engines
differ in the matter of identified modifications, with Mascot generally
being able to detect more oxidations, carbonyls, and His +5 Da over
PEAKS (
Table
2
).
Table 2
Types of Modifications Detected by
Mascot and PEAKS in the HbHp Complex
Mascot
PEAKS
oxidation
144
47%
112
40%
dioxidation
36
12%
30
11%
carbonyl
61
20%
42
15%
decarboxylation
22
7%
21
8%
Met –32 Da
7
2%
4
1%
His +5 Da
19
6%
9
3%
His –10 Da
16
5%
10
4%
Arg deguanidination
4
1%
5
2%
His → Asp
a
NA
13
5%
His → Asn
a
NA
14
5%
trioxidation
a
NA
17
6%
a
Only defined for search in PEAKS.
Principal Component Analysis
Principal
Component Analysis
(PCA) was employed to further analyze the results of the selected
search engines using the PSM score, the probability of the modification
site, and the intensity of the peptide as criteria. The PCA revealed
the grouping of IDs into distinct clusters and relations among the
selected criteria. For each condition (Hb, Hp, and HbHp), the PCA
yielded 3 dimensions, with the representation of supplied variables
(Score, Site, and Intensity) being similar across conditions.
The PCA statistical models for hemoglobin-only and haptoglobin-only
samples (
Figures S2–S7
) show a similar
behavior (in terms of the ID’s distribution and the representation
of variables) as for the HbHp complex sample. For this reason, the
HbHp complex sample was selected for further examination.
In
the case of the HbHp complex, a statistical evaluation was performed
for modified peptides of both proteins listed together. The results
obtained by Mascot contained 175 modified peptides of Hb and 134 modified
peptides of Hp. The first two dimensions yielded by PCA explained
44.4% and 32% of the data set variability, respectively. Dimension
1 represents mainly the Score and Intensity (both by roughly 60%),
and the Site is represented by 15% (
Figure S8A
). The Score and Intensity exhibit a 75% positive correlation with
Dimension 1 (
Figure S9A
). This alignment
indicates a very high cross-correlation between Score and Intensity.
Dimension 2 represents almost 85% of Site variability, with more than
92% positive correlation of Site with Dimension 2.
The distribution
of the modified peptides in the PCA plot (
Figure
2
A) shows that most
of the IDs are accumulated in a horizontal cluster at the top of the
plot. A closer look shows that oxidations predominate toward the right
side (alongside the Score and Site vector), in contrast to the left
side, which is populated by a more diverse spectrum of modifications,
including carbonyls, His −10 Da, and His +5 Da. On the basis
of manual validation, the modified peptides from this cluster are
identified with a high certainty, which corresponds to precise coverage
of the modified residue in the MS/MS spectrum. An example is Trp oxidation
in a peptide with the sequence SAVTALWGK in its singly charged
form at
m
/
z
948.51 and RT 9.2 min
(
Figure
3
A). The spectrum
shows 10 fragment ions out of 16, including a b3–b8 ion series
with b6 and b7 ions covering exactly the site of modification. The
second linear cluster of IDs spanning the middle of the distribution
shows once again that oxidations are mainly on the right side of the
cluster, whereas carbonyls and dioxidations are located on the left
side. The exact site of modifications falling into this group could
not always be precisely determined due to an incomplete or unconvincing
fragmentation spectrum. Leu carbonyl in the peptide VLSPADKTNVK
in its doubly charged form at
m
/
z
593.33 at RT 12.5 min (
Figure
3
B) is such a case. The spectrum contains only y-ions,
with y10 missing, leaving both Val1 and Leu2 as possible sites of
modification. The IDs scattered in the bottom area of the PCA plot
(mainly oxidations) are subject to great uncertainty with insufficient
peptide fragment coverage, for example, Tyr10 oxidation in a peptide
with the sequence DYAEVGRVGYVSGWGR in its triply charged
form at
m
/
z
596.29 and RT 9.8 min
(
Figure
3
C).
Figure 2
Principal component
analysis of modified peptides identified in
the HbHp complex sample by (A) Mascot and (B) PEAKS. The plot of color-coded
modifications shows their distribution within dimensions defined by
the PCA. The vectors show the correlation of the variables with the
PCA dimensions. The logAScore variable represents the probability
of site determination. In both cases, the IDs are distributed into
3 clusters. For Mascot, most of the IDs are in the top cluster, while
for PEAKS, the majority of the IDs are in the middle cluster.
Figure 3
Fragmentation spectra of selected IDs from the PCA model
of the
Mascot search results for the HbHp complex. The ⧫ sign labels
the precursor ion. (A) Trp7 oxidation (+15.995) in the peptide SAVTALWGK
in its singly charged form at
m
/
z
948.51 and RT 9.2 min from the top cluster, y3 −H
2
O undetected by Mascot was annotated manually; (B) Leu2 carbonyl
(+13.979) in the peptide VLSPADKTNVK in its doubly charged form
at
m
/
z
593.33 and RT 12.5 min from
the middle cluster; (C) Tyr10 oxidation (+15.995) in the peptide DYAEVGRVGYVSGWGR
in its triply charged form at
m
/
z
596.29 and RT 9.8 min from the bottom cluster. The representative
IDs show that the PCA is able to separate reliable, questionable,
and unreliable modified peptides.
Because there is no fragmentation coverage between
the y6 and y15
ions, there are 5 possible sites of modification, making this ID unusable.
Given these points, the PCA model for Mascot shows a good separation
of reliable, questionable, and completely unreliable IDs.
As
for the PEAKS search of the HbHp complex, the input list contained
150 Hb modified peptides and 124 Hp modified peptides. Dimension 1
accounts for 45.4% of the variability, and Dimension 2 accounts for
33.3%. Dimension 1 represents Score and Intensity by 68% (
Figure S8B
), with both variables being positively
correlated with Dimension 1 by over 82%, but the Score and Intensity
variables show only partial cross-correlation. One possible explanation
is the additive merging of MS/MS spectra. While fragments from several
scans could contribute to the PSM score, the intensity of the compound
in the chromatogram might be low. Dimension 2 represented the entirety
of the logAScore variability (99.97%) and was fully positively correlated
(99.99%). The PCA model (
Figure
2
B) shows separation into 3 clusters. Manual validation
has shown that the top horizontal cluster consists predominantly of
IDs that are unambiguous by definition. This means that there is only
one residue in the peptide sequence that could carry out the modification.
For illustration, the fragmentation spectrum of Val carbonyl in the
TNVKAAWGK peptide in its singly charged form at
m
/
z
988.52 at RT 7.27 min (
Figure
4
A) consists of very low intensity signals.
Nevertheless, this ID has been assigned the highest certainty possible.
The second cluster spans around the center of origin and includes
most of the IDs. This cluster predominantly consists of oxidations,
carbonyls, decarboxylations, and dioxidations. Closer inspection revealed
that most of these IDs have a low AScore, although the fragment coverage
seems sufficient.
Figure 4
Fragmentation spectra of selected IDs from the PCA model
of the
PEAKS search results for the HbHp complex: (A) Val3 carbonyl (+13.979)
in the peptide TNVKAAWGK in its singly charged form at
m
/
z
988.52 at RT 7.27 min from the top
cluster; (B) Val3 oxidation (+15.995) in the peptide with the sequence
LRVDPVNFK in its doubly charged form at
m
/
z
552.31 at RT 8.19 min from the middle cluster; (C) His13
oxidation (+15.995) in the peptide LLGNVLVCVLAHHFGK in
its doubly charged form at
m
/
z
897.00
at RT 21.01 min from the bottom cluster. The selected IDs show that
the fragmentation coverage of the site of modification and signal
intensity do not have a clear relation to the AScore and position
within the PCA clusters.
For example, the fragmentation
spectrum of Val3
oxidation in a
peptide with the sequence LRVDPVNFK in its doubly charged form
at
m
/
z
552.31 at RT 8.19 min (
Figure
4
B) contains 14 out
of 16 fragment ions; yet, the assigned AScore is 20.41. The third,
linear cluster at the bottom consists of IDs with absolute uncertainty
of position (with AScore = 0), although the fragmentation spectra
might cover the entire peptide sequence. For instance, His13 oxidation
in the LLGNVLVCVLAHHFGK peptide in its doubly charged
form at
m
/
z
897.00 at RT 21.01 min
(
Figure
4
C), whose
fragmentation spectrum contains almost all possible fragments. Our
explanation is that the merged spectrum contains a number of low-intensity
signals, and the fragment ions determining the oxidation position
to be His13 are among those low-intensity signals (y3, y4, b11, b12).
Additionally, in the sequence scheme on the top, PEAKS indicates that
there is supposedly a b14 fragment, but such a signal is not present
in the spectrum. Furthermore, after manual validation of the spectrum,
we were able to annotate ions 367.2, which corresponds to y3 carrying
oxidation, and 1081.44, which corresponds to y9 carrying carbonyl.
Thus, sometimes the AScore cannot be confident. These results show
that, even though the PEAKS IDs are separated by PCA into distinct
clusters, the relation to certainty in site determination is inconclusive.
From the modified peptides identified by both Mascot and PEAKS, 4
representatives have been selected for comparison. First, Met15 oxidation
in a peptide with the sequence VADALTNAVAHVDDMPNALSALSDLHAHK
in its triply charged form at
m
/
z
1004.84 and RT 16.61 min is a highly probable and extensive modification.
Both search engines were able to identify numerous fragmentation ions
(
Figure S10
) and thus assign a very high
score (Mascot: 153.34; PEAKS: 105.68), but PEAKS did not account for
relatively strong y14 and b18 ion signals assigned by Mascot. Furthermore,
Mascot evaluated the certainty of oxidation localization as almost
100%, determining it to be located in the top cluster of the PCA plot.
PEAKS, on the other hand, evaluated its certainty only as AScore 11.12,
which ranks among the lower ones and means localization to the lower
part of the middle cluster.
Second, the His11 carbonyl from
the peptide with the sequence VVAGVANALAHK
in its doubly charged form at
m
/
z
582.33 and RT 9.44 min represents a low abundance modification.
The identification done by Mascot comes from ions b4, y5, and y7–y10,
which do not cover the site of modification (
Figure S11A
). The assigned score of 32.1 is among the lower ones.
The coverage is not sufficient to differentiate between positions
Leu9 and His11, yet Mascot sides with the latter, signaling 49.82%
certainty, ranking within the middle cluster of the PCA plot. His11
carbonyl identified by PEAKS relies on the fragmentation spectrum
with numerous clear y-ion signals, together with several b-ions on
the level of noise (
Figure S11B
), resulting
in a middle tier score of 71.05. Although PEAKS shows almost AA-level
fragmentation sequencing, AScore 14.04 indicates not very high certainty
of the position and localization to the lower part of the middle cluster.
Val5 oxidation in the VVAGVANALAHK peptide in its doubly
charged form at
m
/
z
583.34 at RT
5.9 min is the third example. In this case, Mascot assigned a high
score of 102.79, while PEAKS assessed the identification at a score
of 60.44, which represents the low end of the evaluation scale for
PEAKS. The fragmentation spectrum used for identification by Mascot
contains y-ions only, with just y1 and y8 ions missing (
Figure S12A
). Since the y7 and y9 ions border
the Gly-Val residues and the oxidation is not defined for Gly, Mascot
gives a site determination confidence of 99.99%, ranking as the top
cluster ID. The identification by PEAKS relies on 10 (out of 11) y-ions
and 8 b-ions (
Figure S12B
). Although the
PSM score assigned by PEAKS is among the lower ones, the fragmentation
coverage is sufficient to give the AScore of 26.57, meaning middle
cluster in the PCA.
Finally, the Glu5 decarboxylation in the
peptide KQLVEIEK
in its monocharged form at
m
/
z
956.58
at RT 5.43 min represents identification, which has a low score from
both search engines (Mascot: 23.72; PEAKS: 50.06). The fragmentation
spectrum for identification done by Mascot (
Figure S13A
) lacks precise coverage of the site of modification, with
only low intensity b6-H
2
O and b6-NH
3
ions differentiating
between the Glu5 and Glu7 positions. This results in 68.98% confidence
in site determination and localization to the lower part of the top
cluster. The fragmentation spectrum for PEAKS identification (
Figure S13B
) contains 11 out of 14 possible fragments,
but the signals for b2, b5, b6, y4, and y5 have a borderline noise-level
intensity. The site determination is evaluated with a fairly confident
AScore 24.32, meaning middle cluster.
These results demonstrate
that Mascot is able to assess confident
site determination for modifications, even in cases of a lower PSM
score. On the other hand, a high PSM score of PEAKS IDs does not guarantee
a reliable determination of the modification site. Similarly, IDs
with lower PSM score can still result in a reliable localization of
the modification. From a user point of view, Mascot assignments have
a clear relation to the fragmentation coverage of the modification
position, while the AScore value does not provide reliable guidance
on the certainty of modification localization. The AScore evaluation
appears to be low, even in cases with a high fragmentation coverage.
Additionally, the highest possible confidence (AScore of 1000) is
reachable only for unambiguously defined modifications. Furthermore,
the additional merging performed by PEAKS yields its identifications
and classification inconclusive, as there is little to no option to
confirm PEAKS identifications against the raw data.
Conclusions
The results of this study show that the
selection of the search
engine for FPOP data evaluation has a significant impact on the detected
modifications. We compared the consistency of selected search engines
within replicates and compared results of the search engines with
each other, where Mascot shows greater consistency over PEAKS. The
number of identifications detected by both search engines was limited
(31%). Principal Component Analysis revealed distinct clusters of
modified peptides based on their scores, site probabilities, and intensities.
Mascot identifications show a more confident site determination and
a clear relationship between the quality of the fragmentation spectrum
and the assigned site confidence. From the point of view of data evaluation,
Mascot requires less manual validation. Most of the IDs belong to
the top cluster and are reliable. Manual validation of the IDs from
the middle cluster is advisable, with oxidations generally scoring
better than carbonyls. Modifications below the middle cluster should
be discarded. Clustering of PEAKS IDs does not relate clearly to the
reliability of identification, which leads to the need for manual
validation of the majority of the results. Furthermore, data refinement
performed by PEAKS prevents backchecking with raw data.
Overall,
this study provides insights into the performance and
differences between Mascot and PEAKS in the analysis of FPOP data.
We conclude that using Mascot for FPOP data leads to more reliable
and understandable IDs and requires less manual validation. Still,
there is the need for further development and automatization of the
data processing workflow for FPOP analysis.