Introduction
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are essential
in core biological processes
such as transcription, translation, gene expression,
etc
. More than 2000 RBPs have been reported and found to play critical
roles in diverse cellular processes including DNA repair, post-transcriptional
modification, and cancer progression through their interactions with
RNAs.
1
Moreover, RNA–protein interactions
regulate viral replication and are often misregulated in neurological
disorders and cancers.
2
−
5
Therefore, RBPs have garnered considerable attention in both biological
research and biotechnological applications.
RBPs commonly exhibit
modular structures characterized by the presence
of multiple repeats of a limited set of domains.
6
The RNA-binding domains can assemble in diverse configurations,
thereby creating adaptable RNA-binding surfaces. The modular architecture
of the RBPs imparts the capacity to engage RNA with enhanced specificity
and affinity compared to individual domains. Previously, significant
advancements have been achieved in tailoring the RNA sequence specificity
of Pumilio/fem-3-binding factor (PUF) repeat domains.
7
,
55
A comprehensive recognition amino acid code for each of the four
RNA bases has been determined, granting substantial flexibility in
the design of protein specificity.
8
Engineered
PUF domains have been effectively integrated with diverse effector
domains to serve various purposes, such as tracking RNA localization
within cells,
9
,
10
creating site-specific RNA endonucleases,
11
and regulating the translation and stability
of specific mRNA molecules
in vivo.
(
12
) These developments suggest a wide range of potential applications
for RBPs as versatile tools for biotechnological applications. For
example, peptides originating from RNA-binding domains such as RBM39,
SAFA, or hnRNPK have been conjugated with the Penetratin cell-penetrating
peptide (CPP) to effectively inhibit cancer cell proliferation by
disrupting RNA–protein interactions.
13
,
14
While nature has provided a repertoire of naturally occurring
RBPs,
these existing RBPs represent only a fraction of the potential repertoire
of RBPs given a large fraction of the possible folds remains unexplored.
15
RNA-binding domains that remain unexplored in
nature not only hold promise for the expansion of our biotechnological
toolkit but also harbor the potential to deepen our understanding
of the fundamental mechanisms governing these molecular interactions.
These profound insights, in turn, serve to facilitate the rational
design of
de novo
RNA-binding proteins. Therefore,
high-throughput screening for
de novo
RNA-binding
peptides from a random peptide library offers a novel repertoire of
RNA-binding peptides that have not existed in nature. Especially,
targeting single-stranded RNA regions provides ground insights regarding
nucleotide-specific recognition, which are highly beneficial for precise
RNA probing and mRNA regulation. It is worth noting that single-stranded
RNA regions play a crucial role in regulating virus infection and
oncogene expression, emphasizing the importance of the development
of
de novo
RNA-binding peptides.
16
,
17
For example, cytosine-rich regions are present in the 5′
untranslated region of the RNA of hepatitis-C virus and poliovirus.
3
,
18
The cytosine-rich regions regulate transcription levels
via
the interaction with the host poly(C)-binding proteins
(PCBPs).
3
,
19
,
20
Poly(A)-binding
proteins (PABPs) are also known as essential eukaryotic mRNA regulators
promoting the circularization of mRNA to enhance translation efficiency.
21
−
23
In vitro
display methods such as phage display,
ribosome display, and mRNA display have been used as a powerful tool
to screen novel peptide aptamers against versatile targets.
24
−
27
Indeed, Li et al. recently reported a
de novo
hydrophobic-cationic
RNA-binding peptide using phage display.
28
mRNA display is a widely used
in vitro
selection
technique to rapidly isolate functional peptides from libraries of
more than 10
13
molecules. It has been applied to directed
evolution studies, drug development, and cellular proteomics analysis.
30
,
31
mRNA display uses a stable covalent link between mRNA and its cognate
polypeptide, thus enabling a selection for versatile protein functions
such as protein binding, ATP-binding, and catalytic function including
RNA ligation.
32
−
34
mRNA display platform has also been diversified,
for example, using a cell-free system to analyze protein–protein
interaction and screening enzyme inhibitors.
35
,
36
More recently, mRNA display combined with a reconstituted cell-free
translation system (PURE mRNA display) has achieved high efficiency
in
in vitro
selection by minimizing the carry-over
of intrinsic cellular components.
29
,
37
,
38
However, there is an apparent downside for the mRNA
display when it comes to RNA binding. Especially if the target RNA
contains a stretch of a single-stranded region (>5 nt), it can
form
a stable base-pairing between the mRNA, and therefore, mRNA harboring
complementary sequences of the targeted RNA will be selected and hinder
the selection process. To overcome this issue, Dr. Nemoto’s
group invented the cDNA display method to mask mRNA with reverse-transcribed
cDNA.
39
,
40
They also applied this method with a codon-restricted
library to screen for
de novo
tRNA (tRNA) binding
peptides consisting of four prebiotically relevant amino acids.
41
Similarly, Giacobelli et al. explored sequence
variants of the C-terminal domain of ribosomal protein uL11 using
PURE mRNA display and selected a primitive uL11 protein analog only
composed of 10 prebiotically plausible amino acids.
42
These previous studies demonstrate that peptides with a
limited amino acid sequence can still interact with structurally conserved
tRNA and rRNA. In this study, we mitigate the base-pairing problem
by restricting the codon usage of the DNA library and demonstrate
the efficiency of a codon-restricted mRNA display technique in targeting
low-complexity single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), which can be further implemented
to target biological RNA sequences.
Materials and Methods
All oligos were ordered through
FASMAC Inc. (Kanagawa, Japan).
All peptides were chemically synthesized and purified with high purity
(>90%) by GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) unless specified (methods
for
in vitro
transcription;
in vitro
RNA transcription;
puromycin-DNA-tag ligation; synthesis of mRNA-peptide conjugate by
in vitro
translation; gel purification; negative selection
of mRNA-tag by the affinity with polyRNA; peptide selection based
on the affinity with polyRNA; reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR);
sequence analysis; principal component analysis; calculation of hydrophobicity
and net charge of peptide; enrichment analysis of combinatorial amino
acid pairs; microscale thermophoresis are shown in the
Supporting Information
. The complete list of
DNA and RNA oligos used in this work is available in
Table S1
).
DNA Library Preparation
DNA libraries were prepared
by annealing two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligos and then extension
via
the Klenow fragment. The VMM/VRR codon library was produced
from PolyAGCU-binding-F oligo (2 μM) and VMM/VRR codon library-R
oligo (2 μM), whereas the HHY codon library was synthesized
from PolyAGCU-binding-F oligo (2 μM) and HHY codon library-R
oligo (2 μM). The oligo DNA pairs were mixed with dNTP (200
μM) in Klenow buffer (Takara Bio; Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan) and
annealed by heating at 90 °C for 1 min and then cooling slowly
to room temperature. Subsequently, 4 U of Klenow fragment (Takara
Bio; Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan) was added to the reaction mixture. The
primer was extended at 25 °C for 5 min and then 37 °C for
1 h followed by inactivation of the enzyme at 50 °C for 15 min.
The linearized DNA libraries, VMM/VRR codon library, and HHY codon
library were then purified with NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up Kit
(Macherey-Nagel; Düren, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany). The
DNA library was quantified by agarose gel electrophoresis (2.5% w/v
agarose gel in 1× tris-acetate-EDTA (TAE)). The electrophoresis
was run at 100 V for 40 min. The gel was then stained with SYBR Gold
Nucleic Acid Gel Stain (Invitrogen; Waltham, MA). Gel images were
captured and analyzed using an Amersham Imager 680 (GE Healthcare;
Chicago, IL). Nucleic acid concentrations were quantified with a NanoDrop2000c
spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA).
Codon-Restricted mRNA Display Method
We followed the
basic protocols of the PURE mRNA display method and made minor updates
for this study.
38
For details, see the
Supporting Methods
. In brief, RNA libraries were
produced by
in vitro
transcription from a DNA library,
followed by puromycin-DNA-tag ligation. The ligated products are separated
by gel electrophoresis and purified from the gel with electroelution
and ethanol precipitation. As a preliminary step, an undesired mRNA-tag
with an affinity to polyRNA is removed from the mRNA-tag pool. The
remaining mRNA-tag is then used for
in vitro
translation
using a cell-free system. Peptide-mRNA conjugates were gel-purified
and mixed with polyRNA displayed on strep-tactin-immobilized magnetic
beads. Biotin-eluted samples were amplified by reverse transcription
PCR to obtain a DNA library for the following selection round. The
above procedures are repeated for the next round of selection.
Next-Generation Sequencing
Next-generation sequencing
(NGS) was applied to the DNA library from each round (round 0 to round
7) using a MiSeq system (Illumina; San Diego, CA). A Qubit 2.0 fluorometer
(Invitrogen; Waltham, MA) with a Qubit dsDNA HS assay kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA) was used to quantify sequencing libraries
precisely. DNA sequencing libraries were generated using a NEBNext
Ultra II DNA Library Prep kit (New England Biolabs, Inc.; Ipswich,
MA). To enable multiplex analysis, unique index sequences were added
to the DNA sequencing library by NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina
(Index Primers Sets 1 and 2; New England Biolabs, Inc.; Ipswich, MA).
Finally, the lengths of the constructed DNA libraries were confirmed
by an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara,
CA), and paired-end sequencing was performed using a Miseq Reagent
Kit v3 (600 cycles).
Spectral Shift Experiment
Chemically synthesized Cyanine5
(Cy5)-labeled oligonucleotides were obtained from FASMAC Inc. (Kanagawa,
Japan). While AP1 and AP2 were completely dissolved in the binding
buffer (tris-HCl (10 mM; pH 8.0) and Tween 20 (0.05%, v/v)), both
CP1 and CP2 formed aggregates when the concentration reached above
10 μM. Therefore, aggregation-free SpS measurement was applied
to determine the dissociation constant (
K
D
). Spectral shift experiment (SpS) was conducted with the identified
RNA-binding peptides in three independent experimental trials on a
Monolith X (NanoTemper Technologies; Munich, Bayern, Germany).
43
The oligonucleotide solutions were prepared
in a buffer containing tris-HCl (20 mM; pH 8.0) and Tween 20 (0.1%,
v/v), and the peptide solutions were prepared in RNase-free water.
A 2-fold dilution series of the unlabeled peptides was prepared in
20 nM oligonucleotide, with the final concentrations of peptides ranging
from 10 μM to 0.3 nM or 500 to 15 nM. Samples were incubated
for 30 min at room temperature. Following incubation, the samples
were filled into standard treated capillaries (NanoTemper Technologies;
Munich, Bayern, Germany) and subsequently subjected to SpS detection
analysis. General settings were applied for all SpS experiments as
follows: manual temperature control: 25 °C; LED laser: red. LED
power settings were chosen individually for each sample by adjusting
the LED power to yield a fluorescence signal of at least 200 units.
For SpS detection, the fluorescence was recorded simultaneously at
650 and 670 nm for 5 s without the application of a temperature change.
The obtained values were normalized and plotted against the peptide
concentration. The dissociation constant was then determined by using
a single-site model to fit the curve.
Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
The circular dichroism
(CD) spectra were recorded using a J-1100 CD spectrophotometer (JASCO;
Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan) over the wavelength range of 190–250
nm in steps of 1 nm with an averaging time of 1 s per step. Peptides
were prepared in a buffer containing tris-HCl (pH 8.0; 10 mM) and
Tween 20 (0.05%, v/v) with a final concentration of 0.2 mg/mL, and
the CD spectra were measured in 1 mm path-length quartz cells at 25
°C. The CD signal was obtained as ellipticity in units of millidegrees,
and the resulting spectra were averaged from two scans and the buffer
spectrum was subtracted. All CD measurements were performed twice.
Results
Peptide Library Design
The scheme for codon-restricted
mRNA display is outlined in
Figure
1
A. We designed two types of DNA libraries encoding
33-mer randomized polypeptide sequences, each targeting 12-mer poly(A)
and poly(C) RNA (
Figure
1
B). To avoid unwanted base-pairing between mRNA and the target RNA,
codons including the complementary nucleotide were eliminated from
the coding sequence. For example, the DNA library targeting poly(A)
RNA comprises two types of degenerate “VMM” and “VRR”
codons both lacking thymine nucleotide, which encodes a total of nine
(Ala/Thr/Asn/Asp/Glu/Gln/Lys/His/Pro) and five (Gly/Gln/Glu/Arg/Lys)
types of amino acids, respectively (
Figure S2A
), whereas the DNA library targeting poly(C) RNA comprises a single
degenerate codon “HHY” lacking guanine nucleotide, which
encodes a total of nine types of amino acids (Leu/Ile/Phe/Tyr/Ser/Thr/Asn/His/Pro)
(
Figure S2B
).
Figure 1
Selection of
de novo
peptide libraries against
single-stranded RNA using codon-restricted mRNA display. (A) Schematic
representation of codon-restricted mRNA display. The selection was
conducted seven times in total based on the affinity with either poly(A)
or poly(C) RNA. The DNA libraries from each round (rounds 0–7)
were subjected to next-generation sequencing (see detailed schematics
in
Figure S1
). (B)
In vitro
mRNA display enables the creation of peptide libraries from codon-restricted
DNA libraries. The coding region of the VMM/VRR codon DNA library
consists of “VMM” or “VRR” degenerate
codons, while the HHY codon library comprises “HHY”
degenerate codons (the codon translation table is available in
Figure S2
). (C) Synthesis of mRNA-peptide conjugates
via in vitro
translation.
In vitro
translation
reactions were conducted using puromycin-DNA-tagged mRNA as templates
and separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels (stacking gel: 3.5% w/v polyacrylamide
gel; separation gel: 10% w/v polyacrylamide gel). The image was captured
by using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) fluorescence (left). The
gel images taken in each round are available in
Figure S4
. The efficiency of the conjugate formation was calculated
based on the band intensities of the conjugate and free mRNA-tag (right).
In Vitro
Selection of
De Novo
RNA-Binding Peptides
The two DNA libraries were generated
(
Figure S3A
) and subjected to our codon-restricted
mRNA display method. A puromycin-DNA tag was attached to the 3′
ends of the mRNA library created
in vitro
(
Figure S3BC
). Next, through
in vitro
translation, we isolated the mRNA-peptide conjugates (
Figure
1
C). The conjugate formation
efficiency of the HHY codon library reached 68.9%, in contrast to
the VMM/VRR codon library, which was only 19.5%. This trend was consistent
throughout multiple rounds of selection (
Figure S4
). The mRNA-peptide conjugates were subjected to affinity
selection against poly(A) or poly(C) RNA. Finally, to generate a cDNA
library for the next round of selection and deep sequencing, the eluted
molecules were subjected to reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) (
Figure S5
). Seven rounds of selection were performed,
with the cDNA sequences obtained from each round analyzed by the Illumina
Miseq platform to monitor the enrichment of specific amino acids or
peptide motifs expected to play a role in RNA binding.
Sequence Analysis
The peptide sequences obtained
via
deep sequencing were analyzed by FastAptamer software
to count and rank the unique peptide sequences based on the normalized
reads per million (RPM) values.
44
We first
analyzed the top 100 enriched peptides from each round to compare
the progression of the enrichment throughout the selection. For the
VMM/VRR codon library, the average RPM values of the top 100 enriched
peptides constantly increased until round 6 (
Figure
2
A). In contrast, the HHY codon library has
reached the RPM peak at round 3 and gradually decreases subsequently
(
Figure
2
B). We further
performed clustering analysis with the peptide sequences in round
7 from each library based on their sequence similarity. For the VMM/VRR
codon library, the 30 most enriched sequence clusters account for
only 12.1% of all peptide sequences, with the most enriched cluster
sequences sharing 1.5% of all peptide sequences (
Figure
2
C). In contrast, the HHY codon
library was dominated by a single peptide cluster sequence covering
77.6% of all sequences, outcompeting the second-ranked cluster peptide
sequences (
Figure
2
D).
Figure 2
Sequence analysis of RNA-binding peptides. (A, B) Violin plots
displaying reads per million (RPM) values for the top 100 enriched
peptide sequences per selection round. The dashed lines indicate quartile
values, while the solid line represents the mean. (C, D) Pie charts
illustrating the proportions of the top 30 enriched peptide clusters
from round 7 of screening. The RPM values of the top sequences within
each cluster are depicted across the selection rounds: (C) poly(A)
RNA-targeting VMM/VRR codon library and (D) poly(C) RNA-targeting
HHY codon library. AP1–3 and CP1–3 are the top sequences
of the three most enriched clusters in round 7.
Amino Acid Composition Analysis of Enriched Peptide Sequences
To further analyze the sequence profile of our enriched peptides,
the consensus sequence logos were created from the top sequences of
the 30 most enriched 30 clusters (
Tables S2 and S3
). As a result, in the poly(A) RNA-targeting VMM/VRR codon
library, we observed a clear enrichment of glutamine (Q) appearing
as the most frequently used amino acid at several positions (
Figure
3
A). Overall enrichment
of asparagine (N) followed by threonine (T) and histidine (H) was
observed throughout the poly(C) RNA-targeting HHY codon library (
Figure
3
B). Next, we calculated
the log2-fold change in amino acid frequencies after seven rounds
of selection. For the VMM/VRR codon library, the frequency of the
positively charged amino acids Lys (K) and Arg (R), which are known
to be common at RNA-binding interfaces, decreased (log2-fold change
= −0.46 and −0.33, respectively), while the frequency
of the hydrophilic amino acids His (H), Gln (Q), Pro (P), and Thr
(T) increased (log2-fold change = 0.94, 0.50, 0.32, and 0.20, respectively)
(
Figure
3
C). Similarly,
in the HHY codon library, the frequency of hydrophilic amino acids
Asn (N), Thr (T), and His (H) increased (log2-fold change = 0.89,
0.56, and 0.29, respectively) and hydrophobic/aromatic amino acids
Ile (I), Leu (L), Tyr (Y), and Phe (F) decreased (log2-fold change
= −0.68, −0.79, −0.51, and −0.81, respectively)
(
Figure
3
D). The overall
trend in the amino acid frequency change is also visualized as a distribution
of the principal component analysis plot (
Figure S6
). We observed a significant enrichment of the amino acids
harboring the carboxamide group in both libraries (Gln (Q) in the
VMM/VRR codon library and Asn (N) in the HHY codon library). Also,
the two-dimensional plot of net charge vs hydrophobicity index has
shown that the enriched peptides from the HHY codon library remained
electrically neutral (at pH 7.4) while significantly shifting toward
lower hydrophobicity within the peptide sequence space (
Figure
3
E). Whereas the peptides from
the initial VMM/VRR codon library possessed diverse net charge profiles
(−5 to 15) along with overall low hydrophobicity profiles (−2
to −3), enriched peptides converged toward a narrow net neutral
to positive charge window (0–5). The enrichment toward low
hydrophobicity indicates the overall soluble feature of the selected
peptide pool.
Figure 3
Amino acid composition feature of selected RNA-binding
peptides.
(A, B) Sequence logos were generated from peptide sequences in round
0 and round 7, respectively. For round 0 (before screening), 1000
randomly selected peptide sequences were used. The top sequences of
the two most enriched clusters are listed below: (A) VMM/VRR codon
library and (B) HYY codon library. (C, D) Log2-fold changes of amino
acid frequencies after the whole selection are shown. The dotted line
indicates a log2-fold change threshold of 1.0: (C) VMM/VRR codon library
and (D) HHY codon library. (E) The two-dimensional plot represents
hydrophobicity vs net charge indexes of individual peptides from round
0 (randomly selected 1000 sequences) and round 7 (top 30 sequences)
libraries.
Dissociation Constant Analysis of the Identified RNA-Binding
Peptides
We chose the top two most enriched sequence clusters
from each library (CP1/CP2 and AP1/AP2) to test their affinity against
polyRNAs. As a result, AP1 only expressed very low affinity toward
poly(A) RNA (
Figure
4
A), whereas the three peptides AP2, CP1, and CP2 have exhibited apparent
affinity to their targeted polyRNAs with the dissociation constants
(
K
D
) of 18.8, 0.9, and 1.2 μM, respectively
(
Figure
4
B–D).
CP1 and CP2 exhibited slightly high affinity with the target poly(C)
RNA over the nontarget poly(A) RNA, although they retain the affinity
with poly(A) RNA within a range of single μM (
K
D
) (
Figure
4
C,D). On the contrary, AP2 revealed 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower
binding affinity toward its target RNA than CP1 and CP2; however,
AP2 exhibited specific interaction with poly(A) RNA (
Figure
4
B).
Figure 4
Thermodynamic plots of
the identified RNA-binding peptides against
polyRNAs. Thermodynamic plots were generated to determine
K
D
values between the identified peptides and
polyRNAs. The
K
D
values were determined
by spectral shift (SpS) experiments for (A) AP1, (B) AP2, (C) CP1,
and (D) CP2. The bars represent the mean ± SE from three independent
experimental replicates.
Further, by using CP1 and AP2 as a model for
de novo
RNA-binding peptides, we tested the sugar recognition
by switching
the target sequence from polyRNA to polyDNA. As a result, both AP2
and CP1 still exhibited affinity toward their DNA targets while AP2
but with approximately 2-fold less affinity compared to that of RNA
(
Figure S7
). Then, to examine the role
of nucleobase recognition in RNA–peptide interactions, we performed
additional affinity analysis using the RNA hybridized with antisense
DNA. Our findings revealed that AP2 lost its affinity for hybridized
poly(A) RNA (
Figure S8A
). Similarly, CP1
exhibited a significantly lower affinity for poly(C) RNA, with approximately
a 6-fold decrease compared to its affinity for nonhybridized poly(C)
RNA (
Figure S8B
). This observation strongly
suggests that nucleobase–peptide interactions play a significant
role in determining the affinity.
Role of Enriched Dipeptide Motifs Found in the RNA-Binding Peptide
Sequences
Next, we calculated the frequency of combinatorial
amino acid pairs (i.e., dipeptide motifs) enriched in the two libraries,
expecting overrepresented dipeptide motifs to play an essential role
in RNA binding. We found that the top 100 selected poly(C) RNA-binding
peptides were strictly enriched in the dipeptide motifs comprising
the (His/Asn/Thr) amino acid combinations (
Figure
5
A), whereas the top 100 selected poly(A)
RNA-binding peptides still comprise a broader spectrum of the enriched
dipeptide motifs that include one of the six (His/Asn/Gln/Glu/Pro/Thr)
amino acids (
Figure
5
B).
Figure 5
Identification of the enriched combinatorial amino acid pairs and
dissociation constant analysis of the identified RNA-binding peptide
variants. The enrichment scores of combinatorial amino acid pairs
were calculated by comparing the frequency between the peptides from
rounds 0 and 7 of each library. Hierarchical clustering was employed
to visualize the enrichment scores through heat mapping for (A) the
HHY codon library and (B) the VMM/VRR codon library. (C) Table showing
the dissociation constants between the peptide variants and polyRNAs.
NH-to-SH substitution (pink) and TN-to-TS substitution (blue) are
highlighted. The complete thermodynamic plots are available in
Figure S10
.
To experimentally validate the function of enriched
dipeptide motif
residues, we substituted QNQ with TTT in the AP2 peptide due to the
significant enrichment of QN and NQ motifs, which both contain glutamine,
which is highly enriched in the VMM/VRR codon library. Nevertheless,
the
K
D
and specificity toward adenine
were unaffected by the replacement of QNQ with TTT (
Figure S9A
). Additionally, we created a truncated peptide
called “AP2-short”, consisting of 6–26 AP2 residues,
to identify the specific residues responsible for adenine recognition.
As a result, the affinity of AP2-short was approximately 5 times lower
(
K
D
: 82.0 μM) than that of full-length
AP2. However, the truncated peptide still recognized poly(A) RNA specifically
(
Figure S9B
). Finally, we introduced a
single point mutation, replacing glutamine (Q) with serine (S), in
the middle of the sequence within AP2-short. This mutation resulted
in a decreased dissociation constant (
K
D
: 114.7 μM), demonstrating that a single residue substitution
can increase the overall affinity toward poly(A) RNA. The truncated
region (1–5 and 27–33 positions) contains two of the
most enriched amino acids in the top 30 clusters of the VMM/VRR library:
glutamine (Q) and proline (P), as well as the two basic amino acids,
lysine (K) and arginine (R), which are well-known for their interaction
with RNA and DNA. Additionally, five enriched dipeptide motifs (PQ/QP/PK/QK/RP)
are found in the truncated region and could potentially serve as RNA-binding
interfaces. However, additional mutagenesis is necessary to confirm
the involvement of specific residues in the interaction between RNA
and peptide.
As for the CP1 peptide, we designed two variants
by replacing Asn
with Ser within the two most enriched dipeptide motifs (NH and TN)
to determine the residues responsible for the RNA-binding capability.
Serine mutation was used instead of the commonly used alanine to avoid
decreasing the peptide solubility. Both mutants, NH to SH and TN to
TS, lost the binding capability against polyRNAs to below detection
limits (
Figures
5
C
and
S10
), indicating that asparagine alongside
histidine and threonine residues are involved in the recognition of
polyRNAs. In an attempt to reveal the effect of the mutations on the
peptide structure, CD spectroscopy was performed with native CP1 and
its mutant peptides (
Figure
6
). The CD spectrum of CP1 showed a distinct maximum at 195
nm and a minimum at 218 nm, indicating the formation of a β-sheet
structure. On the other hand, the TN-to-TS mutant peptide displayed
a distinct random coil structure, with a single minimum at 198 nm,
indicating that TN-to-TS mutagenesis induced a structural transition
from a β-sheet into a random coil structure. Likewise, NH-to-SH
mutagenesis resulted in a shift of the minimum from 218 nm in the
native peptide to 208 nm, indicating a partial loss in the β-sheet
structure to form a random coil structure. Altogether, the mutagenesis
resulted in the structural transition from β-sheet toward the
random coil signal, emphasizing the importance of β-sheet structure
for the RNA-binding capability of CP1.
Figure 6
CD spectra of the CP1
peptide and its variants. CD spectra were
measured for each peptide with a concentration of 0.2 mg/mL in a buffer
containing tris-HCl (pH 8.0; 10 mM) and Tween 20 (0.05%, v/v). The
CD spectra were acquired in duplicate and averaged: CP1 (green), CP1
NH → SH (pink), and CP1 TN → TS (blue).
Finally, to observe the effect of TN and NH motifs,
the AP2 peptide
sequence was modified by replacing the two QNQ motifs with the TNH
motif (combination of TN and NH). This modification aimed to enhance
AP2’s poly(C) RNA-binding capability while retaining its inherent
ability to bind poly(A) RNA. By replacing QNQ with TNH, AP2 recognized
poly(C) RNA as expected (
K
D
: 120.3 μM)
and displayed notably higher affinity for poly(A) RNA (
Figure S9C
). This observation is consistent with
CP1’s proficiency at binding poly(A) RNA. Thus, the TNH sequence
acts as a versatile ssRNA-binding motif that prefers cytosine.
Synthetic Poly(C) RNA-Binding Peptide Interacts with Cytosine-Rich
Oncogenic RNA Motifs in a Human Plasma-like Medium
To evaluate
the synthetic ssRNA-binding peptide’s affinity for biologically
derived RNA targets, we have chosen two cytosine-rich RNA motifs from
the oncogenic Cdk6 3′UTR RNA and
MYU
lncRNA.
These motifs have previously been identified as targets of hnRNPK,
45
and they both consist of extended cytosine repeats
(>4 nt) within a necessary single-stranded region for the progression
of colon cancer cells. We found that the CP1 peptide can bind to RNA
motifs with submicromolar
K
D
s. Specifically,
it can bind to both Cdk6 3′UTR RNA (103.2 nM) and
MYU
lncRNA (107.2 nM) in a medium that mimics human plasma (see
Figure
7
). Notably, CP1 showed
a comparable
K
D
to that of hnRNPK with
Cdk6 3′UTR RNA (
K
D
: 450 nM).
45
On the contrary, CP1 did not demonstrate any
affinity toward the established negative control for hnRNPK cytosine-poor
Gas5 hp RNA, suggesting a preference for a single-stranded cytosine
repeat. As CP1 exhibited a stronger inclination toward Cdk6 3′UTR
RNA compared to hnRNPK, we proceeded to mutate the cytosine-rich,
single-stranded regions of Cdk6 3′UTR RNA to confirm the contribution
of these polyC regions to CP1 binding. The replacement of two extended
cytosine repeats positioned at 4–8 and 20–22 with adenine
repeats (C-repeat-substituted mutant of Cdk6 3′UTR RNA) resulted
in losing the binding ability (
Figure
7
), demonstrating that CP1 interacts with the polyC
regions of Cdk6 3′UTR RNA.
Figure 7
Assessment of the affinity of poly(C)
RNA-binding peptides to cytosine-rich
oncogenic RNA motifs. The table displays the dissociation constant
(
K
D
CP1
) between hnRNPK-associated
RNAs and CP1 peptides. The
K
D
CP1
s were measured using microscale thermophoresis in a human plasma-like
medium. Cytosines predicted to be single-stranded within RNA ligands
are highlighted in red. Cytosine-to-adenine substitution is highlighted
in blue. The predicted secondary structures are available in
Figure S11
. The complete thermodynamic plots
are shown in
Figure S12
. *The
K
D
hnRNPK
s are the dissociation constants between
hnRNPK-associated RNAs and hnRNPK determined by fluorescence anisotropy
binding assay reported in the previous study.
45
Discussion
mRNA and cDNA display has been commonly
used as efficient tools
to explore large peptide sequence space against versatile binding
targets (library size can reach up to ∼10
13
molecules).
Previous
in vitro
selection studies have shown that
various RNA- and DNA-binding peptides can be selected.
41
,
42
,
46
,
47
However, screening for
de novo
peptides that can
interact with low-complexity ssRNA remains a major challenge using
the mRNA display due to unwanted base-pairing between mRNA and target
RNA. Therefore, we decided to take a new approach to combine a codon-restricted
DNA library with mRNA display to overcome the problem mentioned above.
Our
in vitro
selection successfully led to the
identification of four novel
de novo
RNA-binding
peptides (AP1/AP2/CP1/CP2) interacting with poly(A) or poly(C) RNA.
Deep sequencing revealed significant glutamine (Q) and asparagine
(N) composition enhancement in the top 30 enriched cluster sequences
of each library. It has been known that Watson–Crick and Hoogsteen-type
interactions can occur between the Q/N carboxamide group and purine/pyrimidine
nucleobases (
Figure S13
).
48
,
49
It was, therefore, not surprising that all four newly identified
RNA-binding peptides are enriched in Q/N residues (AP1: 18%, AP2:
39%, CP1: 36%, CP2: 27%). The most significant case was the CP1 peptide,
relying solely on the asparagine residues within the top 2 most enriched
TN and NH dipeptide motifs (enrichment >250%;
Figure
4
B). The fact that CP1 binds
to poly(C) RNA
with a
K
D
of 900 nM, which is approximately
4- and 7-fold stronger compared to binding poly(A) RNA and poly(C)
DNA, suggests that the asparagine carboxamide group is in contact
with both bases (A and C) as well as 2′ OH of the ribose. This
is consistent with the evidence that the carboxamide group can form
a hydrogen bond with 2′ OH either directly or indirectly bridged
by a water molecule.
49
,
50
The decrease in
K
D
was not as prominent in the AP2-poly(A) DNA interaction,
suggesting that 2′ OH is less important for AP2 recognition.
Indeed, AP2 affinity toward poly(A) RNA (
K
D
: 18.8 μM) was orders of magnitude lower than that of CP1,
and specificity toward adenine moiety may suggest the recognition
via
the Hoogsteen pseudo-pair. At least in the case of DNA
duplex, Hoogsteen base-pairing is ∼3 kcal/mol higher in energy
than the Watson–Crick base-pairing,
51
which may explain the relatively low affinity of AP2 and AP1. Because
the configuration of the cytosine–asparagine interaction in
the HHY library is limited to the Watson–Crick pseudo-pair
(
Figure S13
), we speculate that limited
structural configuration along with the lack of positively charged
amino acids likely resulted in the steep and noncontinuous fitness
landscape leading to the dominance of CP1 cluster sequences occupying
77.6% of the entire population after seven rounds of selection.
As opposed to the HHY library, the variety of amino acids that
can interact with polynucleotides is clearly diverse in the VMM/VRR
library. We observed that the two QNQ sequences consisting of the
highly enriched QN/NQ dipeptide motifs (enrichment >100%;
Figure S9A
) can be replaced by TTT sequences,
suggesting either (i) the hydroxyl group in threonine can complement
the hydrogen bonding of the carboxamide group, (ii) peptide backbone
is involved in the interaction, or (iii) these residues are not in
direct contact with the poly(A) RNA. While truncation and point mutation
led to a stepwise decrease of AP2 affinity but did not entirely lose
the binding, we consider the involvement of multiple amino acid residues
that contain other enriched dipeptide motifs. Also, since we did not
incorporate metal cations during the selection, the previously reported
cation-mediated interaction between acidic amino acids and RNA
42
is unlikely to be involved. Therefore, we assume
that net negative acidic peptides (net charge < 0) were unfavorable
under our RNA-binding condition, resulting in a constrained chemical
parameter space of the enriched peptides after seven rounds of selection.
A clear trend toward decreasing hydrophobicity in both libraries may
indicate that the selected peptides do not prefer forming a tertiary
soluble structure with hydrophobic core, in order to maximize the
interface with the unstructured linear RNA. The fact that RNA-binding
capacity was affected by a single amino acid (Q or N) substitution,
as well as N- and C-terminal end truncation, further supports this
hypothesis.
In nature, structured cellular PCBPs possess multiple
KH domains
that bind to cytosine triplet at the hydrophobic cleft formed by a
small GXXG loop and variable loop.
52
The
positively charged amino acid residues surrounding the cleft attract
the oligonucleotide, and specific recognition of cytosine is realized
by a dense network of hydrogen bonding with conserved amino acid side
chains (Asp, Arg, Glu, Gly, Ile, and Lys).
53
Such a coordination requires a stable tertiary structure that short
peptides cannot provide. However, our novel poly(C) RNA-binding peptide
(CP1), which is enriched with Asn, Thr, and His, can interact with
RNA that is rich in cytosine with a comparable affinity to that of
hnRNPK with the KH domain. This suggests that the RNA-binding mechanism
differs significantly from that of typical RNA-binding domains. Since
the CP1 peptide contains four motifs (NH and TN) that recognize cytosine
within its sequence, it is possible that having multiple cytosine-recognizing
motifs contributes to the preference for cytosine repeats. Additionally,
secondary structure analysis performed through CD spectroscopy confirmed
a distinct β-sheet structure in CP1, whereas the two unbound
variant peptides led to complete/partial disruption of this β-sheet
structure (
Figure
6
). This result indicated that unlike the other poly(C) RNA-binding
proteins in nature, which utilize a loop structure as a binding surface,
the CP1 peptide likely supports the interaction with polyRNAs
via
its β-sheet structure. Furthermore, the fact that
polyQ/polyN peptides do not exhibit strong affinity toward polyRNA
(
Figure S14
) clearly indicates that a tandem
Gln/Asn sequence alone is not enough to support affinity toward polyRNA.
Although further characterization is necessary to uncover the precise
binding mechanism, our findings showcase the effectiveness of our
methodology in examining variations in peptide sequences that have
not been investigated in natural settings.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our cell-free codon-restricted
mRNA display approach
identified a catalog of possible
de novo
ssRNA-binding
peptides from a synthetic peptide library containing limited amino
acid alphabets. Newly identified
de novo
ssRNA-binding
peptides exhibit significant promise as versatile RNA-binding tags
with a wide array of potential applications ranging from the modulation
of translation and stability in targeted mRNA molecules to the labeling
of specific RNA molecules within cells. Our method also offers an
opportunity to design unstructured-RNA targeted drugs such as developing
pharmaceutical candidates for neurodegenerative disorders. The future
incorporation of genetic code expansion and codon reassignment technology
54
will lead to the expansion of our method to
further explore unnatural peptide sequence space with desired amino
acid combinations, including noncanonical amino acids.