Introduction
Peanut (
Arachis hypogaea
L.) is
one of the most important oilseed crops globally, providing both edible
oil and protein-rich seeds for human consumption.
1
The seeds of peanuts are the main components of this crop
consumed by humans. The composition of lipid species in peanuts is
critical for both human health and nutrition. Therefore, understanding
lipid metabolism in peanut seeds is crucial for human health and nutritional
value.
Lipids are a vast group of naturally occurring molecules
that are
insoluble in water but soluble in nonpolar solvents. They store energy,
act as structural components of cell membranes, and signal biological
processes. Lipids are also involved in many biological processes in
plants, including seed germination, organ differentiation, leaf senescence,
and pollination.
2
With advances in genomics,
transcriptomics, and proteomics, researchers have adopted metabolomics,
a qualitative and quantitative analysis of all metabolites, to facilitate
functional genomics research. Lipidomics, first defined by Han and
Gross, is a discipline concerned with studying the characterization
of all lipid molecules in organisms and their roles in protein expression
and gene regulation.
3
,
4
Recent years have seen much attention
being paid to lipid research, and lipidomics research methods have
made significant breakthroughs.
The application of advanced
mass spectrometry has enabled the quantitative
analysis of eight lipid types, including fatty acids (FAs), glycerolipids
(GLs), glycerophospholipids (GPs), sphingolipids (SPs), sterol lipids
(STs), prenol lipids, saccharolipids, and polyketides, in various
crops, including peanut, hickory (
Carya cathayensis
Sarg.), rape (
Brassica napus
L.),
and hazelnut (
Corylus heterophylla
Fisch.
ex Trautv.).
5
−
8
The local concentrations of lipid species are essential at different
plant growth stages.
6
Our earlier study
revealed that the initiation of FA accumulation in high-oleic peanut
seeds occurred in the earliest stages after flowering.
9
Seed size is a critical agronomic trait for crops,
and peanut has
over 300 varieties grown in tropical and subtropical regions.
10
Usually, large seeds contain more nutrients
and energy stored and thus have a higher potential for germination
and stronger environmental stress tolerance during seedling establishment.
11
Peanut seeds contain protein, starch, lipids,
flavonoids, and other chemical constituents.
12
Seed development quality directly affects seed germination, seedling
morphogenesis, and even crop yield. The size of the seeds is closely
related to the characteristics of the seedlings, especially if their
growth primarily depends on substances stored in the seeds. Additionally,
the amount of lipid accumulation in peanut seeds determines their
yield and quality.
Peanut is an allotetraploid, with its diploid
ancestors being
Arachis duranensis
(AA)
and
Arachis
ipaensis
(BB). The genome sequences of cultivated
tetraploid peanut species, including
A. hypogaea
cv. Tifrunner, Shitouqi, and Fuhuasheng, the wild allotetraploid
species
Arachis monticola
, and the
diploid wild species
A. duranensis
and
A. ipaensis
, have been completed.
7
,
13
−
17
Advances in transcriptomics and lipidomics offer insights into transcriptional
regulation and metabolic flux. Screening lipid metabolites and their
associated genes provides valuable information regarding the lipid
biosynthetic and metabolic pathways, as well as the associated regulatory
networks.
18
In recent studies, researchers
have investigated the lipid composition and changes in embryogenesis,
maturation, and roasting of peanut seeds, especially high-oleic peanut
seeds.
7
,
19
To date, however, no study has been conducted
on the lipidomics profile during seed development and germination
stages in large-seeded peanut varieties, which can reveal the dynamic
changes of key nutrient lipid molecules at the different seed mature
stages as well as the germinated stages.
Here, the objectives
of this research were (1) to study the lipidomics
of the peanut seeds of the large-seed peanut cultivar
A. hypogaea
cv. ZP06 at the four seed developmental
stages (D1–D4) and three germination stages (G1–G3),
and (2) to conduct the transcriptomics of the seeds at different seed
development and germination stages to sequence 21 RNA samples. The
identification of individual lipid species and their dynamic changes
in their quantities in peanuts at different stages could provide deeper
insights into their biological and nutritional functions. Furthermore,
the transcriptomics would reveal the regulatory mechanisms of the
lipid synthesis pathway in peanut seeds during maturation and germination.
This research could also contribute to the development of healthier
and more sustainable peanut-based products. Our research could provide
a comprehensive overview of the relationship between peanut lipids
and genes and offer new insights into the lipid nutrition of large
peanut seeds.
Materials and Methods
Plant
Material and Lipid Standards
A large seeded peanut
cultivar (
A. hypogaea
cv. ZP06) was
developed in this laboratory and used as an experimental material
in the present study. The ZP06 peanut is a Virginia-type variety with
large pods and seeds. The mature seeds of ZP06 (hundred-seed weight:
130.1 g) are approximately 2.11 cm in length and 1.11 cm in width.
20
The growth period of ZP06 is approximately 130
days. The plants were grown in the scientific and educational park
of Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou City, China (113.63E,
37.75N). Seeds for germination were placed in a growth chamber at
22 °C with 250–300 μmol/m
2
/s photosynthetically
available radiation and a 16 h light/8 h dark cycle. Seed samples
were collected at different specific developmental stages (15, 30,
45, and 60 days after gynophore entered the soil, named D1, D2, D3,
and D4, respectively) and different germination stages (1, 5, and
10 days after germination, named G1, G2, and G3, respectively). The
seed samples (1–5 g) were frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately
and stored at −80 °C for lipid extraction and subsequent
transcriptomics and lipidomics analysis. Three replications were performed
for these experiments. All lipid standards, including phosphatidylethanolamine
(d7-PE-15:0/18:1), phosphatidylserine (d7-PS-15:0/18:1), phosphatidylglycerol
(d7-PG-15:0/18:1), phosphatidylinositol (d7-PI-15:0/18:1), glycerophosphatidic
acid (d7-PA-15:0/18:1), lysophosphatidylethanolamine (Lyso PE 18:1(d7)),
phosphatidylcholine (d7-PC-15:0/18:1), lysophosphatidylcholine (Lyso
PC 18:1(d7)), sphingomyelin (SM-d18:1–18:1(d9)), cholesterol
ester (CE-18:1(d7)), triacylglycerol (TAG 15:0–18:1(d7)-15:0),
diacylglycerol (DAG-15:0–18:1(d7)-15:0), monacylglycerol (MAG-18:1(d7)),
ceramide (Cer-d18:1-d7/15:0), and fatty acid (d4-FA-16:0) were purchased
from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL, U.S.A.). A mixed solution
of all internal standards was prepared in DCM/MeOH (3:1, v/v), and
the mixture was stored in −20 °C until further use. The
concentration of 15 internal standards was 10 μg/mL.
Lipid
Extraction
A total of 21 seed samples were divided
into seven groups for the lipidomics study, including D1, D2, D3,
D4, G1, G2, and G3. Each group had three biological replicates. All
lipids from the seed were extracted by a modified method.
6
Briefly, about 15 mg of a sample freeze-dried
and ground to powder was combined with 80 μL of internal standard
(10 μg/mL), and 2 mL of methanol was added to precipitate the
protein overnight at −20 °C. Next, 4 mL of dichloromethane
was added, followed by vortexing for 1 h. The sample was then mixed
with 1.6 mL of ultrapure water, vortexed for 30 s, centrifuged, and
the supernatant was removed. This process was repeated twice with
the addition of 4 mL of dichloromethane to extract any remaining supernatant.
The merged supernatant was dried using nitrogen blowing, redissolved
with 1 mL of CHCl
3
/MeOH (v/v, 1:1), filtered through a
0.22 μm organic membrane, and injected into the machine.
LC–MS
Analysis
Large-seed peanut lipidomics
analysis using the previous method with partially modified.
21
In brief, liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
consisted of the Shimadzu UPLC 30A system (Shimadzu) coupled to a
Sciex TripleTOF 6600 system (AB Scienx). The lipid extract sample
was separated by the nonpolar C18 column (Kinetex C18 column, 100
× 2.1 mm, 2.6 μm, Phenonex) with a SecurityGuard precolumn
(C18 guard column, Phenomenex). The injection volume was 1 μL,
the column temperature was maintained at 60 °C, and the flow
rate was 400 μL/min. Initially, gradient elution started with
20% solvent B (IPA/ACN = 5:1, v/v; 5 mM ammonium acetate) and 80%
solvent A (water/MeOH/ACN = 1:1:1, v/v/v; 5 mM ammonium acetate) for
0.5 min. Solvent B increased from 40% at 0.5 min to 60% at 1.5 to
3 min and then increased to 98% between 3 and 13 min, subsequently
decreasing to 20% at 13 to 13.1 min, and finally 20% from 13.1 to
17 min; the total running time is 17 min. The MS parameter settings
are as follows: the ion injection voltage was configured to be 5500
V (+) and −4500 V (−) within the mass range of
m
/
z
100 to 1200. The curtain gas was at
35 psi, and the two ion source gases (Gas1 and Gas2) were set at 50
psi, while the temperature of the interface heater was 600 °C.
Data Analysis and Lipid Identification
Freely available
MS-DIAL, version 4.92 (
http://prime.psc.riken.jp
), and commercially available software packages PeakView, MasterView,
and MultiQuant were applied to lipid profile analysis studies.
22
Before dealing with MS-DIAL data processing,
the original mass spectrometry data files were converted from the
original SCIEX format (.wiff) to the analysis base file format (.abf).
Each of the MS/MS spectra features was matched with the integrated
LipidBlast database by MS-DIAL software to identify lipidomics. All
lipid species were identified by mass accuracy precursor ions (<0.01
Da), fragment ions (<0.05 Da), isotope patterns (differences, <10%),
MS accurate mass tolerance (0.01 Da), MS/MS accurate mass tolerance
(0.05 Da), and identification score cutoff (80%). The lipid quantification
method was conducted by MasterView (version 2.0) and MultiQuant (version
3.0.3), including lipid name, retention time,
m
/
z
. Identified lipid species was quantified via internal
standards (IS) and the relative peak area (analyte area/IS area).
Quality Assurance
In order to monitor the stability
and evaluate the data quality produced by the AB Sciex Triple TOF
6600 system in real time, equal amounts of each sample were injected
as quality control (QC) samples. One QC sample was injected after
every ten analytical samples. Unsupervised principal component analysis
(PCA) was conducted by the statistical function prcomp within R (
www.R-project.org
). PCA showed
that the QC samples of LC–MS lipid profile data were closely
clustered throughout the entire analysis process, indicating that
the measurement had good instrument reproducibility and stability.
21
mRNA Library Construction and Sequencing
Total RNA
was isolated from 21 peanut seed samples (three biological replication/each
seed stage) and extracted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s procedure. The RNA amount
and purity of each sample were quantified using NanoDrop ND-1000 (NanoDrop,
Wilmington, DE, USA). The sequencing library preparation and high-throughput
sequencing were carried out by Illumina Novaseq 6000 (LC-Bio Technology
CO., Ltd., Hangzhou, China). Only clean reads with a perfect match
or one mismatch to the reference genome sequence were further analyzed
and annotated based on the reference genome. All subsequent analyses
were based on clean, high-quality data.
Statistical Analysis
Differential gene/lipid screening,
GO functional annotation, and KEGG pathway analysis were performed
for all other periods using the data on D-60 as a control, and the
following are the screening criteria. Significantly regulated metabolites
between groups were determined by variable importance in projection
(VIP) ≥ 1 and absolute Log
2
fold change (FC) ≥
1. VIP values were extracted from the OPLS-DA result, which also contains
score plots and permutation plots and was generated using the
R
package MetaboAnalystR. The data was log-transformed (log
2
) and mean-centered before OPLS-DA. In order to avoid overfitting,
a permutation test (200 permutations) was performed. Differentially
expressed genes are evaluated from both fold change and significance
level, and here, the fold change FC ≥ 2 or FC ≤ 0.5
and
p
-value <0.05 were taken as the criteria for
significance, and the genes screened were considered differentially
expressed and displayed as yes in the signal column of the result
file. The correlation of gene expression with lipid accumulation was
detected using the WGCNA R software package.
22
Results
Lipidomic Profiling of the Large-Seed Peanut
Variety ZP06
ZP06 samples were collected at four developmental
stages (D1, D2,
D3, and D4) and three germination stages (G1, G2, and G3) for lipidomic
analysis with ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) quadrupole
time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS). Chromatograms (
Figure S1A
) and PCA (
Figure S1B
) demonstrated consistency between biological replicates,
indicating that the lipid data were accurate and reliable. Diagnosis
and identification of fatty acid chains were based on matching MS/MS
spectra ion fragment information characteristics with the MS-DIAL
database (
Figure S1C
). In total, 332 types
of lipids were identified (
Table S1
), including
DAGs, TAGs, free fatty acids (FFAs), PCs, PEs, and others (
Figure S2
), and their content was displayed in
the Circos map at different seed developmental and germination stages
(
Figure
1
A,B). They
were classified into five main categories (class I): GLs (148 types),
GPs (97 types), FAs (8 types), SPs (66 types), and STs (13 types),
with proportions of 44.58, 29.22, 2.41, 19.88, and 3.92%, respectively
(
Table S1
). Lipids were further classified
into 24 subclasses, including TAGs (95 types), DAGs (22 types), PEs
(24 types), FFAs (8 types), and PCs (23 types) (
Figure
1
B;
Table S2
).
Notably, there were more different types of TAGs than any other subclass.
The total lipid contents gradually increased across both the seed
development and germination stages (
Figure
1
C), peaking at D4 (247.83 μmol/g) and
G3 (207.11 μmol/g), respectively (
Figure S3
).
Figure 1
Lipidomic analysis of large-seed peanuts during the seed development
and germination processes. (A) Circos plot showing contents of all
lipid types at each of the analyzed different stages. (B) Abundance
of lipids in each category. (C) Total lipid contents at each of the
analyzed different stages. (D) Distribution of lipid carbon chain
lengths. (E) Distribution of lipid carbon chain unsaturation numbers.
(F) Proportions of fatty acid types among TAG, DAG, PC, PE, PA, and
FA lipid molecules.
Because the lipid carbon
chain length and saturation are closely
related to lipid function, we analyzed these characteristics among
the identified lipids (
Table S3
). The lipid
chain lengths ranged from 16 to 78 carbons, with most falling between
18 and 36; lipids with 36 carbons were the most abundant (
Figure
1
D). Carbon chain
unsaturation numbers varied from 0 to 12, with the most common unsaturation
numbers being 2 (22.2%), 1 (20.1%), 3 (15.3%), and 0 (12.6%) (
Figure
1
E). Notably, the
hydroxylated-triacylglycerols (HO-TAGs), monogalactosyldiacylglycerols
(MGDGs), diacylglyceryl glucuronides (DGGAs), PAs, cardiolipin (CLs),
PSs, and glucosylceramides (HexCers) did not contain any saturated
fatty acids (SFAs) (
Table S3
).
Figure
1
F shows
the FA compositions of specific lipid classes. In TAGs, lipid molecules
were composed of SFAs, monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), diunsaturated
fatty acids (DUFAs), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) with
their respective proportions of 37.3, 28.1, 28.9, and 5.7%, where
palmitic acid (16:0, 12.7%), oleic acid (18:1, 24.7%), linoleic acid
(18:2, 28.5%), and linolenic acid (18:3, 5.7%) were found to be their
major FAs, respectively (
Figure
1
F). DAGs were predominantly composed of SFAs (47.7%),
MUFAs (25.0%), DUFAs (18.2%), and PUFAs (9.1%), with the primary FAs
being palmitic acid (16:0, 18.2%), oleic acid (18:1, 22.7%), linoleic
acid (18:2, 18.2%), and linolenic acid (18:3, 9.1%), respectively
(
Figure
1
F). The primary
FA molecules were nearly identical in the PA, PE, and PC groups. Overall,
these results showed that large-seed peanut is rich in long-chain
fatty acids and that the most abundant FA molecules in all lipid classes
were UFAs, particularly oleic acid, linoleic acid, and linolenic acid,
similar to most grains.
Dynamic Changes in Large-Seed Peanut Lipid
Profiles during Seed
Development and Germination
In mature seeds (D4), the content
of TAGs and DAGs in GLs is as high as 173.99 and 39.93 μmol/g,
accounting for 77.90 and 17.88% of total lipids, respectively (
Figures
2
A and
S2
;
Table S4
). Notably,
18:1/18:2/18:2, 18:1/18:1/18:2, and 18:1/18:1/18:1 were the most abundant
TAG species, accounting for 13.96, 13.96, and 11.91%, respectively,
of the total lipids (
Table S1
;
Figure S4
). Among DAGs, 18:1/18:2 and 18:2/18:2
were the most abundant (8.71 and 6.97%, respectively). The most abundant
TAGs and DAGs were consistent between the G3 and D4 samples. Of the
GPs, PCs (16:0/18:2, 18:1/18:2, and 18:2/18:2) were present at the
highest levels in both D4 and G3 samples. Significantly, most PCs
(17 of 21) were reduced in germinated peanut (G3) compared with the
mature seeds (D4), as were TAGs and CLs. In contrast, most FFAs, DAGs,
HO-TAGs, digalactosyldiacylglycerols (DGDGs), PGs, and Cers were accumulated
at higher levels in germinated peanuts than in mature seeds (
Figure
2
B). Except for these
lipid species, overall, the lipid composition is similar in mature
seeds and sprouted peanuts, but the lipid content is different, which
is due to the dynamic changes in the lipid profile during seed development
and germination processes, respectively.
Figure 2
Differentially accumulated
lipids (DALs) in large-seed peanuts
during seed development and germination processes. (A) Lipid composition
in mature seeds (D4) and peanut sprouts (G3). (B) Distribution of
up-regulated and down-regulated lipid species at the G3 stage compared
to the D4 stage. Lipids were classified as differentially accumulated
at thresholds of fold change ≥1.2 or ≤0.80 and
p
< 0.05. (C) Total number of up-regulated and down-regulated
lipid species between each pair of consecutive time points. Lipids
were classified as differentially accumulated at thresholds of fold
change ≥2 or ≤0.50 and
p
< 0.05.
(D) Unique and shared DALs throughout seed development. (E) Relative
abundance of up-regulated DALs (up-DALs) and down-regulated DALs (down-DALs)
in several lipid classes for each pair of consecutive time points
during seed development. (F) Levels of up-DALs and down-DALs at each
stage of seed development. (G) Unique and shared DALs throughout germination.
(H) Relative abundance of up-DALs and down-DALs in several lipid classes
for each pair of consecutive time points during germination. (I) Levels
of up-DALs and down-DALs at each stage of germination. (J) Levels
of representative DALs during seed development and germination.
The lipid content of different lipid species varies
with stages,
and thus the differently accumulated lipids (DALs) between each adjacent
growth stage were compared. A total of 282 DALs (
Table S5
) were obtained (
Figures
2
C and
S5
). During
seed development, the largest number of DALs (
Tables S6–S8
) were present between D2 and D3 (
Figure
2
C,D), indicating
that the metabolism of life activities is more vigorous in these stages,
which are the rapid filling period for the seed. The number of up-regulated
DALs (up-DALs) decreased gradually across the comparisons, suggesting
that levels of specific lipids peaked at different periods. The majority
of up-DALs were GLs, whereas the majority of down-regulated DALs (down-DALs)
were GPs (
Figure
2
E).
The total GL and GP contents steadily increased during these periods
(
Figure
2
F). Some of
the GLs and GPs (including 49 TAGs, 12 HO-TAGs, and 24 Cers) showed
a continuous increase during the developmental stages; the three most
abundant TAGs were 18:1/18:2/18:2, 18:1/18:1/18:2, and 18:1/18:1/18:1.
A majority of continuously decreasing lipids were GPs, including PIs,
PAs, PGs, and PCs (reflecting the necessity for seeds to store energy
while also continuing to grow and divide). Moreover, we observed a
consistent reduction in PAs (especially 16:0/18:2, 16:0/18:3, and
18:2/18:3) during all developmental stages, possibly as a result of
membrane reorganization during seed enlargement.
In the germination
stage, there were more DALs in the comparisons
of G1 to D4 (
Tables S9–S11
) and
of G2 to G1 than in G3 compared to G2 (
Figure
2
C,G), indicating that changes in the lipid
composition occurred primarily during the first two germination stages.
At the first germination stage, the majority of DALs were down-regulated
GLs and GPs (
Figure
2
H). Although the total GL and GP contents increased as germination
progressed (
Figure
2
I), there were distinct changes in the levels of the individual lipid
components. Among the FFAs, levels of palmitic acid (16:0), stearic
acid (18:0), oleic acid (18:1), linoleic acid (18:2), linolenic acid
(18:3), and docosanoic acid (22:0) significantly increased during
germination, but to varying degrees (
Figure
2
J). Differences in the abundances of these
compounds may have been due to alterations in the cell membrane resulting
from germination; in this stage, energy is supplied to the plant and
the seeds absorb water, causing cells to swell.
23
Notably, there was a dramatic increase (1679%) in
the levels of
HO-TAGs, a potentially beneficial class of lipids, at the first germination
stage. Total HO-TAG contents were 79.39, 195.69, 362.55, 539.42, 9056.00,
5604.07, and 4986.31 nmol/g in stages D1–D4 and G1–G3,
respectively. There were also significant changes in FFA contents
during the development and germination stages; total FFA contents
were 15003.63, 4560.22, 3038.97, 4063.77, 6278.78, 25976.99, and 36529.32
nmol/g at the D1–D4 and G1–G3 stages, respectively.
In contrast to the sharp decreases and increases observed for FFAs
throughout seed development and germination, total HexCer contents
gradually decreased throughout development, with total contents of
1044.46, 836.60, 246.61, 163.30, 87.46, 132.17, and 185.58 nmol/g
at the D1–D4 and G1–G3 stages, respectively. Levels
of β-galactosidase (GLB1) were highest in the early stage of
seed development, suggesting that GLB1-mediated cell wall remodeling
was involved in plant growth, development, and regulation of HexCer
metabolism.
Transcriptomic Analysis of Large-Seed Peanuts
during Seed Development
and Germination
According to the sequencing analysis of the
first generation full-length transcriptome of peanut and the original
reference genome information, we obtained a valid data file size of
8.08–9.50 G for each sample (
Table S12
). This corresponded to 84,714 transcripts, including 67,124 peanut
genomes. The transcripts were analyzed with the Gene Ontology (GO)
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases for functional
annotation, yielding a total of 54,702 GO terms and 22,536 KEGG biochemical
pathways (
Table S13
). Pearson correlation
showed that the correlation coefficient between samples was high,
and the sample clustering was significant (
Figure S6
). Three independent biological replicates for each sample
were consistent with each other, demonstrating the reliability of
the data (
Table S13
). Correlation analysis
(
Figure S6
) showed that samples from the
same period can be clustered together and each growth period can be
distinguished, indicating that there are differences in the profiles
of transcriptomes in each period.
The differences in the whole
transcriptome map changed with seed development and germination. Taking
D-60d as a control, in the developmental stages, there are 7036, 5614,
and 428 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with the criteria of
|FC| ≥ 2 and
P
< 0.05, respectively, in
the comparison group D1 vs D4 (
Table S14
), D2 vs D4 (
Table S15
), and D3 vs D4
(
Table S16
). Among them, most DEGs were
upregulated (
Figure
3
A). The number of DEGs decreased as the development stage approached
seed maturity, indicating that seed accelerated development significantly
at the early stage of development, and the development process slowed
down after 45 days of flowering and approached maturity. In the germination
stages, 10,639, 8531, and 7905 genes were up- or down-regulated in
the comparison group G1 vs D4 (
Table S17
), G2 vs D4 (
Table S18
), and G3 vs D4
(
Table S19
), respectively (
Figure
3
A). These results show that
genes are activated as a part of the transformation mechanism of development
and germination, and the transcriptional regulation of genes in the
early germination stage is significant. The Venn diagram shows the
number in common among all comparison groups (
Figure
3
B), and 142 DEGs were found to be commonly
differentially expressed in all stages. Among them, we found the expression
of gene-encoded vicilin 47 kDa protein (6TFR0H) increased during seed
maturation, was highly expressed at maturity, and decreased during
germination. Moreover, unique DEGs were in the majority in G1 from
D4 (3631 DEGs), with less in D3 to D4 (23 DEGs). The results reported
above indicated there were biological differences in the development
and germination stages of seeds, and there were also certain similarities
in each stage.
Figure 3
Transcriptomics sequencing analysis of large-seed peanuts
during
seed development and germination. (A) Expression levels of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in each comparison group (seed development
stages D1–D3 and germination stages G1–G3 compared to
D4). (B) Unique and shared DEGs between comparison groups. (C) Expression
levels of DEGs involved in lipid metabolism pathways. DEGs with high
expression in early seed development, late seed development, early
germination, and late germination are indicated with the letters a,
b, c, and d. (D) KEGG pathways involved by DEGs in early development.
(E) KEGG pathways involved by DEGs in early germination. (F) KEGG
pathways involved by DEGs in late germination. Modules represent metabolic
pathways, and the size of the modules represents the proportion of
DEGs.
The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
showed that DEGs were significantly
enriched in biological pathways across seven different stages. In
the pathway of the top 20 KEGG-annotated genes, “Metabolism”
contained the most target genes (
Figure S7
). Thus, lipid metabolism-related DEGs were selected (
Table S20
), and their expressions were shown
in the heatmap (
Figure
3
C). The numbers of genes with higher expression in early and late
development and germination were 305, 113, 131, and 308, indicating
block a, b, c, and d in
Figure
3
C, respectively. Further analysis by KEGG showed that highly
expressed DEGs in early development stages were mostly involved in
the pathways of sphingolipid metabolism, inositol phosphate metabolism,
and fatty acid degradation (
Figure
3
D,
Table S21
). The higher-expressed
DEGs in the initial stage of germination were mostly involved in the
pathways of glycerophospholipid metabolism, ether lipid metabolism,
and glycerolipid metabolism (
Figure
3
E,
Table S21
); the high-expressed
DEGs in the late period of seed germinating were mostly involved in
the pathways of fatty acid degradation, glycerolipid metabolism, glycine,
serine, and threomine metabolism (
Figure
3
F,
Table S21
).
Correlations between Lipid Contents and Gene Expression in Large-Seed
Peanuts during Seed Development and Germination
To comprehensively
analyze lipid and gene expression dynamics during the peanut seed
development and germination processes, weighted gene coexpression
network analysis (WGCNA) was conducted using the lipidomic and transcriptomic
data. The above 857 DEGs (
Table S20
) were
used for joint analysis with all the subclass lipids by comparing
the GO and KEGG analysis results of RNA-seq data. Quality control
analysis was performed on developmental and germination gene data,
suitable for in-depth analysis in the next step (
Figures S8 and S9
). The hierarchical cluster tree shows that
the lipid-related genes can be classified into three modules indicated
by different colors, i.e., turquoise (312 genes) (
Table S22
,
Figure S10
), brown (213
genes), blue (312 genes), and gray (14 genes) for development, and
gray (28 genes), turquoise (288 genes), brown (229 genes), blue (245
genes), and yellow (63 genes) (
Figure S11
,
Table S23
) for germination (
Figure
4
A). The turquoise
and blue modules have a higher correlation with subclass lipid compounds
during development and germination, respectively (
Figure
4
A). The high correlations and
low
p
values indicated that these two modules could
be used to identify hub genes associated with the corresponding lipids.
Thus, these two module genes were further analyzed.
Figure 4
Weighted gene coexpression
network analysis (WGCNA) from transcriptomic
and lipidomic data. (A) Significant coexpression modules during seed
development and germination. (B) Network showing correlations of genes
in the turquoise and blue expression modules during seed development
and germination. Blue node genes are shared between the two processes.
Gray and orange (left) are genes unique to seed development; gray
and green (right) are genes unique to germination. (C) Correlation
of glycerolipid metabolism WGCNA genes. (D) Correlation of glycerophospholipid
metabolism WGCNA genes.
For the turquoise and
blue module genes, KEGG pathway enrichment
analysis showed that they were commonly involved in the pathways of
fatty acid biosynthesis, fatty acid degradation, glycosphingolipid
biosynthesis, and glycerolipid metabolism (
Figure S12
). To investigate the gene relationships in the modules,
the above-related genes were subjected to network visualization by
Cytoscape (
Figure
4
B;
Tables S24 and S25
). The 446 nodes
are grouped into different clusters, indicated by colors. In common
genes involved in the metabolism pathways of development and germination
(blue nodes), most of them share a high degree with others (see
Tables S26 and S27
for gene name abbreviations).
Glycerolipid metabolism genes encoding phospholipid: diacylglycerol
acyltransferase (PDAT; ZE5M4X), alcohol dehydrogenase (AKR1A1; CP5KSN,
VZ85GY, 3M1BNC, and 7ND1W), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH; 6QU7U5),
α-galactosidase (KWHJ4Z), sulfoquinovosyl transferase (SQD2;
L6AUEE, YIK7D0), and galactolipid galactosyltransferase (SFR2; FT2DSH)
in these two modules coexisted and were involved in glycerolipid metabolism
(
Figure
4
C). The expression
of almost all these above-indicated genes decreased with development
and then gradually increased with germination, similar to V-shaped,
except for PDAT. In addition, TAG lipase (TGL4-1, E4P4QB; TGL4-2,
K52S6H; TGL4-3, and 92S4AT), glycerol-3-phosphate
O
-acyltransferase 3/4 (GPAT3_4; 0G9KRE), and lysophosphatidic acid
acyltransferase (AGPAT3_4; S2 V0TW) were both involved in the pathway
of glycerolipid metabolism and glycerophospholipid metabolism (
Figure
4
C,D). The expression
of TGLs was higher in germination stages than in development stages.
Moreover, related transcription factors were also found to be differentially
expressed, including the APETALA2 transcription factor WRINKLED1 (WRI1;
QI820R and UVRI66), ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3 (ABI3; 6PZ1IJ, PN7UB6,
Z6Z4XE, and 4K8YXT), FUSCA3 (FUS3; D9C186 and HB4W2S), and transcription
factor MYB118 (VP8GIF and 57FMZL), whose expression was mainly high
during development but germination stage, except for MYB118, involving
controlling seed oil accumulation.
Integrated Analysis of
DALs and DEGs in the Assembly Pathway
of Large-Seed Peanut Seeds during the Development and Germination
Processes
Seed development is accompanied by lipid accumulation.
The molecular pathways include carbohydrate metabolism, FA synthesis,
TAG accumulation/packaging pathways, and oil body or lipid droplet
formation (
Figure
5
). In de novo FA synthesis in the plastid, acetyl-CoA (derived from
sucrose) is the original substrate from which malonyl-CoA is formed
by acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Malonyl-CoA is then catalyzed by FA synthases
in sequential condensation reactions, ultimately producing FAs. Fatty
acid desaturase 2 (FAD2) and FAD3 on the endoplasmic reticulum catalyze
oleic acid (18:1) to form linoleic acid (18:2) and linolenic acid
(18:3) sequentially. We here identified eight
FAD3
genes; expression levels of three (
40PHQK
,
BC0JZ1
, and
ZDHF3I
) were consistent with
linolenic acid contents during the seven seed and sprout growth stages,
showing decreases in the seed development and early germination stages
but increases during late germination. The FAD2 genes identified,
8TPQ4A and BY45PL, were highly expressed, and their expression trend
was similar to the trend in the change in the content of linoleic
acid.
Figure 5
Key changes in lipid metabolism pathways during seed development
and germination, as identified with an integrated lipidomic and transcriptomic
analysis.
The FAs formed in seeds generally
exist in the form of TAG, which
is synthesized through two main pathways. In the Kennedy pathway,
FAs are activated by long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase to form CoA esters,
which are then esterified to glycerol-3-phosphate and form LPA. LPA
is sequentially acylated by 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase
(LPAAT), phosphatidic acid phosphatase (PAP), and diacylglycerol acyltransferase
(DGAT) to produce PA, DAG, and TAG, respectively. The transcript levels
for
LPAAT
(
SD0DCP
and
T5GNGC
) were higher at D2 than at other developmental stages.
DGAT
(
Q8CNLJ
and
U0HZSX
) was highly
expressed in both the late seed development and late germination stages.
In the acyl-CoA-independent pathway, DAG is acylated using PC as the
acyl donor, then catalyzed by PDAT to produce TAG.
24
PDAT
(
10ET88
and
F78IM4
) was most highly expressed at the early development
and late germination stages, whereas
PDAT
(
91WX57
) was more highly expressed during germination than
seed development stages. After synthesis, TAGs are packaged to form
oil bodies attached to various oil body proteins. Oleosin is the main
lipid droplet protein. The transcriptome data showed that the expression
of oleosin (N1YYK3 and YSQ5WX) was higher at D3 and D4 than at D1
and D2.
The molecular pathways involved in lipid degradation
include lipid
decomposition, β oxidation, and the glyoxylate cycle, among
others. TAGs are degraded to free FAs by TGLs. FAs then undergo β-oxidation
in the mitochondria and glyoxysomes to produce acetyl-CoA, which is
subsequently used in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and in carbohydrate
synthesis. We found significant oil body disintegration and decreased
oleosin expression during germination compared to seed development.
Moreover, TGLs were gradually up-regulated throughout germination;
this was particularly notable for
TAGL
(DY4FLS),
which was expressed 94.08- and 54.65-fold higher at G3 and G2, respectively,
than at D4 (
Table S28
). GDSL lipases are
one type of lipolytic enzyme. In the early germination stage, the
expression of
GDSL lipase
(VMW7K4, SLB9HH, and X1KXE8)
was higher at G1 than at D4. At the same time,
phospholipase
D 1_2
(
PLD1_2
; 79BS07 and PYQ6LW), which
cleaves PC to produce PA, had higher transcript levels at G1 than
at D4. Lipoxygenase (LOX2S;
6TJ5BP
and
S6TVHJ
) was similarly up-regulated during early germination, which may
have contributed to FFA oxidation (
Table S28
).
Discussion
Lipids in peanuts have direct effects on
the sensory and nutritional
properties of the peanut products. In recent years, lipidomics has
emerged as a powerful tool for investigating the lipid composition
and metabolism of various plant species. Seeds contain critical resources
for plant survival.
24
An important metabolic
function of mature seeds is the deposition of storage compounds, which
are later mobilized to promote seed germination and seedling growth.
Seeds undergo complex dynamic and physiological changes during their
development, which are associated with a significant change in the
levels of organic acids, sugars, and amino acids, suggesting that
they are effectively incorporated into storage reserves.
25
During seed maturation and germination, changes
in metabolism are associated with distinct expression patterns of
the metabolic genes. Thus, here, we conducted lipidomics and transcriptomics
during seed development and germination processes, aiming to aid understanding
of the related regulation mechanisms for large-seeded peanut.
Storage lipids are known to accumulate in peanut seed. Our present
study shows that various types of lipids already exist at the early
stage of seed development, and lipid content changes with time, indicating
that the lipid network map has been established at the early stage
of development. Comparing peanut ZP06 seed lipids with other species,
which showed the presence of 141 GLs, 89 GPs, 22 SPs, 18 STs, and
13 PRs in green tea and the presence of 2 FAs, 98 GLs, 383 GPs, 10
SPs, and 51 SLs in mature hickory nuts, the results showed that FAs
are more abundant in peanut than other species, which conformed to
the characteristics of oil crop of peanut.
6
,
26
In
high-oleic peanut H176 seeds, there were 547 lipids identified, including
18 FAs, 253 GLs, 182 GPs, 93 SPs, and 1 STs.
5
Thus, the comparison of large seed variety ZP06 and high-oleic peanut
seeds indicated that the species of GLs, FAs, and SPs are more abundant
in the high-oleic peanut H176, and the species of STs are more abundant
in ZP06,
5
indicating diverse lipid molecules
and complex metabolic mechanisms existing in the peanut variety with
specific characteristics. These also could result from detection methodologies
and/or technological disparities. In H176, 60 days after the emergence
of the gynophores, the TAG contents were lower than found at the 50-day
time point. This was attributed to some unknown TAG degradation or
synthesis termination pathways, such as FAs β-oxidation.
5
In this study, the total content of TAGs and
DAGs was continuously accumulated in ZP06 through development processes.
The largest accumulation of TAG occurred in the middle development
stage, when seeds rapidly expanded.
DGATs, including DGAT1,
DGAT2, soluble DGAT3, and wax ester synthase/DGAT,
are rate-limiting enzymes in the final step of TAG biosynthesis.
27
Among them, soluble DGAT3, at present, has only
been identified in peanut and
Arabidopsis thaliana
.
28
,
29
A previous study showed that
AhDGAT1
-
1
,
AhDGAT1
-
2
,
and
AhDGAT3
-
3
expression levels
peak at the late seed development stage.
30
We found here that DGAT was highly expressed during both late seed
development and late germination. Moreover, DGAT was more highly expressed
than PDAT. These results indicated that the Kennedy pathway was the
primary mechanism by which acyl groups were transferred from fatty
acyl-CoA to the DAG backbone for TAG synthesis and lipid storage.
In the complex transcriptional network that controls seed oil accumulation,
MYB transcription factors regulate seed oil biosynthesis by controlling
DGAT1 and PDAT1 expression.
18
,
31
By repressing FA biosynthesis-associated
genes, MYB118 functions as a repressor of FA biosynthesis, and its
expression was very low in this study.
32
Other transcription factors, including WRI1, ABI3, and FUS3, appeared
to play positive roles in the processes of seed development, maturation,
and oil biosynthesis. Expression of these genes enabled the high accumulation
of storage lipids in large-seed peanuts at the seed development stage,
preparing the seeds to provide various metabolites and energy for
later seedling growth at the germination stage.
TAG is a significant
energy storage molecule in plant biosynthesis,
which is essential for seed development and germination. Our results
showed that TAG was the most abundant lipid molecule in peanut seeds
and therefore played a crucial role in germination and growth. Here,
a novel type of TAG, HO-TAG, consisting of 19 subtypes, was found
in peanut seeds. HO-TAG is highly expressed during the peanut germination
stage, with its content spiking at early germination. HO-TAGs have
a structure similar to that of TAGs, except for the hydroxylation
of one fatty acid. The biological functions of HO-TAGs during seed
development remain unclear. Research has shown that hydroxylated fatty
acids can improve glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity and reduce
inflammation in obesity, diabetes, and immune-mediated diseases.
33
Therefore, germinated peanut seeds with high
levels of HO-TAGs may have unique health benefits and are worthy of
further in-depth investigation. Sprouted peanuts are also rich in
many other nutrients and have been shown to possess antioxidant and
antidiabetic properties, making them an ideal candidate for functional
food development.
34
The potential beneficial
properties of germinated peanut seeds should be further investigated
in future studies.
FFAs are differentially accumulated during
seed development and
germination. FAs, which are FFAs, are a major family of structurally
complex lipids. Oleic acid (18:1), linoleic acid (18:2), and linolenic
acid (18:3) were found to be the primary FA molecules of most major
lipid types, such as TAG, DAG, PC, PE, and PA, also in high-oleic
and normal peanuts.
5
In large-seed peanuts,
UFAs showed a higher relative abundance than SFAs, comparable to findings
in mature hickory nuts.
6
Oleic acid (18:1),
linoleic acid (18:2), and linolenic acid (18:3) have high nutritional
value and are necessary for human health; importantly, linoleic acid
and linolenic acid cannot be synthesized by humans and must therefore
be supplied by foods. Furthermore, humans convert α-linolenic
acid to eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5) and docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6),
which enhance immunity.
35
We found levels
of FFAs, particularly linolenic acid, decreased overall during peanut
seed development (
Figure S2
). Linolenic
acid contents were high during the early stages of seed development
(D1 and D2) but decreased over time, consistent with results in high-oleic
and normal peanut seeds.
5
Levels of α-linolenic
acid are generally low in other dietary oil plants, including rapeseed
(7.90%), soybean (6.10%), palm (0.30%), olive (0.60%), corn germ (0.10%),
and sunflower (0.20%).
36
These results
indicate that FFAs may be involved in the assembly process of other
lipids in seed development. In these lipid assembly pathways,
BnDGAT1
preferentially incorporates oleic acid (18:1) into
TAG.
37
However, further studies will be
required to identify functionally related genes and enzymes in peanuts.
TAGs are the primary energy storage substance in the seed development
and germination stages; TAG degradation can produce FFAs and provide
energy and raw materials for seed germination and sprout establishment.
Similarly, phospholipases such as PLA, PLC, and PLD are involved in
lipid turnover through phospholipid hydrolysis and FFA release.
38
We here found that levels of FFAs (16:0, 18:0,
18:1, 18:2, 18:3, and 22:0) were low during the initial stages of
seed germination but increased with time, suggesting the mobilization
of various lipid types during germination. Changes in the peanut seed
FFA composition may have significant implications for the nutritional
value of the derivative products. Oleic acid has beneficial effects
on blood cholesterol levels and cardiovascular health; increases in
oleic acid concentrations during seed germination suggest that the
nutritional value of peanut as a cholesterol-lowering food may increase
throughout seed maturation and could be particularly high in sprouted
peanut.
39
Linoleic and alpha-linolenic
acids, which are essential omega-6 and omega-3 FAs, respectively,
also increased during peanut seed germination, further suggesting
potential health benefits of sprouted peanuts. Therefore, sprouted
large-seed peanuts could be used as a food material for α-linolenic
acid intake. Overall, large seeds of peanut ZP06 could be used as
materials to explore health-influencing factors and also for developing
healthcare peanut products.
In summary, we successfully established
and analyzed the dynamic
lipidomic and transcriptomic profiles of the large-seed peanut variety
ZP06 throughout the seed development and germination stages. The seed
lipid metabolism profile has been established at early development,
especially for TAGs and DAGs that are highly accumulated during embryogenesis.
Storage lipids and phospholipids were subsequently mobilized to provide
energy and raw materials for seed germination and seedling establishment.
Notably, we found a significant increase in HO-TAGs, potential healthy
lipid species, during the early germination stage. The integrated
lipidomic and transcriptomic analyses allowed us to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the coordinated changes in primary lipid metabolism
that drive seed development and germination in large-seed peanut.
These findings provide valuable information on the health-promoting
benefits of large-seed peanut lipids based on the dynamic changes
in comprehensive lipid species at different stages of seed development
and germination. This knowledge may be particularly useful for the
development of healthful peanut products using large-seed peanuts.