Introduction
The human cell surface proteome, or surfaceome,
is encoded by one-fourth
of the genome and represents the cellular interface for communication
with other cells including signaling, cell nutrient transport, and
cell–cell contact.
1
−
3
The surfaceome is also the target
of virtually all biologics and half of small molecule drug targets.
4
Thus, in recent years there has been a surge
of mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches to probe how the
surfaceome is remodeled from health to disease, in terms of protein
expression,
2
,
5
−
7
post-translational modifications
(PTMs) such as glycosylation,
8
−
11
and proteolysis.
12
However,
these approaches have not interrogated changes in the landscape and
dynamics of protein complexes that initiate cell signaling.
In the past decade, the field of protein interactomics has made
huge advances to identify stable protein complexes within the 3D environment
of cells, principally with affinity tagged pull-down mass spectrometry.
13
−
18
The success of this approach requires high-affinity binding between
partners for interactions to survive the pull-down workup. However,
membrane protein interactions are not always captured in pull-down
methods, due to intrinsically lower affinity interactions because
in 2D membrane proteins they have lower entropic freedom.
19
−
21
To address this problem, the field of proximity labeling proteomics
(PLP) has emerged as a way to take covalent snap-shots of proteins
in situ
by localized generation of reactive species containing
a covalent biotin affinity handle for purification.
22
,
23
Peroxidase-based PLP, such as ascorbate peroxidase (APEX),
24
have pioneered our ability to label the local
proteomes of large structures like synapses
25
and cilia
26
within minute time-scales.
However, peroxidases generated hydroxy radicals are long-lived (
t
1/2
∼ 0.1 ms) and estimated to diffuse
large distances, up to 3000 Å.
27
This
labeling distance is more than 10 times the dimensions of typical
binary protein complexes and is prone to capture bystander proteins
in the crowded surfaceome. Chemical cross-linking is a powerful high-resolution
alternative for structural characterization of strong complexes or
dynamic protein states,
28
but necessitates
very close proximity of particular cross-linked residues (typically,
two lysines within about 15–30 Å). Such cross-linking
reactions are challenging to analyze from complex cellular samples
and so have been mostly limited to purified complexes.
29
Thus, there remains a gap for probing transient
protein–protein interactions in complex cellular milieus, especially
membrane proteomes.
In a significant step forward, the Oslund,
Fadeyi, and MacMillan
groups recently described a higher resolution PLP approach, called
μMap.
30
μMap locally generates
short half-lived carbenes (
t
1/2
∼
2–4 ns) from biotinylated diazirine compounds, through illumination
of a protein bound iridium catalyst and Dexter Energy Transfer (DET).
Carbenes are known to insert into C–H bonds, among others,
and indiscriminately label a broad spectrum of amino acid types.
31
,
32
μMap was shown to label cell surface complexes with higher
resolution estimated to have a range of ∼500–600 Å.
30
However, the μMap method placed six to
eight Ir-based catalysts by a random
N
-hydroxysuccinamide
(NHS) labeling of lysines onto a secondary antibody that binds a primary
antibody directed to the membrane protein of interest.
Here,
we calibrated the carbene labeling distances from photocatalyst
sites by site-specific conjugation onto the primary antibody to a
target protein and measured intramolecular and intermolecular carbene
labeling distances
in vitro
. For the test system,
we used Fabs derived from the therapeutic antibody trastuzumab (Traz),
whose structure is known in complex with its drug target, HER2.
33
Through
in vitro
mass spectrometry
studies, we confirmed broad labeling of amino acids at single amino
acid resolution and demonstrated that labeling reaches a maximum distance
of ∼110 Å from the Ir-catalyst site. Furthermore, to improve
the confidence in partners identified on cells, we determined enriched
proteins relative to a nonspecific membrane bound Ir-catalyst control
as opposed to the catalyst on the secondary antibody in solution.
More than a dozen new candidate interacting partners for HER2 were
discovered with strong functional links to breast cancer. These studies
serve to calibrate the distance dependence for carbene labeling and
provide greater spatial resolution and confidence for identifying
membrane neighbors.
Results
Experimental Strategy
We chose the Traz–HER2
system for in-depth analysis because it is structurally well characterized
and is of therapeutic interest. Moreover, Traz binds but does not
impair signaling
35
so would allow us to
identify new partners near the on-state form of HER2. Moreover, we
have previously shown that the Fab for Traz is highly amenable to
single site-specific labeling using engineered methionines and their
specific reaction with oxaziridines for stable and selective bioconjugation.
34
We divided our studies into three parts
(
Figure
1
). First,
we interrogated intramolecular self-labeling
in vitro
by installing single Ir-photocatalysts at eight different sites
in both the VH and CH-1 domains of heavy and light chain in the Fab.
Here we sought to understand how biotin–carbene labeling patterns
varied within the Fab as the attachment site for the Ir photocatalyst
varied. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we evaluated (i)
the precise sites of intramolecular carbene labeling within the Fab,
(ii) the distribution of residue type labeled, and (iii) the distance
dependence from the catalyst site to labeled amino acid by inspection
of the crystal structure (PDB:
1N8Z
) (
Figure
1
A).
Figure 1
Experimental strategy to probe intramolecular, intermolecular,
and on-cell biotin–carbene labeling. A. Intramolecular biotin–carbene
labeling for Ir-catalysts attached at single sites on the Traz-Fab.
Labeling is catalyzed upon blue light illumination, which triggers
localized biotin–carbene generation from free diazirine. Quantitative
mass spectrometry was used to determine the precise sites labeled
by biotin–carbenes. These sites, mapped onto the known structure
(PDB:
1N8Z
),
were used to assess distance dependence. B. Intermolecular labeling
from the Fab-catalyst to HER2 in the complex was performed using the
same procedures as in A, to assess distance dependence from different
Fab-catalyst probes. C. On-cell biotin–carbene labeling of
cells expressing HER2 bound with specific Fab-catalysts (left) or
secondary IgG catalyst (right) compared to the FA-catalyst nonspecific
control (control). HER2 is in blue and hypothetical partner in purple
and bystander in yellow.
Next, we determined intermolecular target labeling
characteristics
from the eight Fab Ir-photocatalyst bound to HER2 in vitro by analyzing
carbene labeling patterns using mass spectrometry (
Figure
1
B). Finally, we determined
the on-cell HER2 interactome using the different Fab-catalysts bound
to HER2 on SKBR3 cells.
36
SKBR3 cells are
a well-known breast cancer cell line that overexpresses HER2 leading
to constitutive oncogenic activation (
Figure
1
C). These on-cell analyses were benchmarked
against a reference NHS randomly labeled secondary antibody strategy
used by μMap. As a nonspecific cellular control, we also created
an Ir-catalyst attached by click-chemistry to an azido-fatty acid
(FA) that readily inserts into the cell membrane. This FA-catalyst
control nonspecifically sampled the membrane proteomic background,
to which both primary and secondary antibody catalysts could be quantitatively
compared for higher confidence interactome identification. We also
show the FA-catalyst control can also serve as a general approach
for membrane PLP.
Analysis of Intramolecular Labeling of the Traz-Fab from the
Ir-Photocatalyst Positioned at Eight Sites
To create the
Fab-catalysts, we expressed eight different single surface Met variants
among 60 sites previously shown to be robustly expressed and quantitatively
labeled with an oxaziridine for click chemistry.
34
Sites chosen were distributed throughout both light and
heavy chains, in both the VH domain proximal to the Fab’s CDRs,
as well as in the CH1 domain distal from the CDRs (
Supporting Information Figure 1A
). These eight Met Fab variants
were expressed into the periplasm of
E. coli
and
purified to >95%; each was labeled to >50% at the engineered
single
Met site using an oxaziridine–azide reagent via a sulfamide
linkage. Stoichiometry was confirmed by mass spectrometry (
Supporting Information Figure 2
A).
34
The Traz-Fab used contains three buried Mets,
which have been shown not to react with the oxaziridine-azide reagent.
34
We next coupled the Ir-catalyst using copper-free
click chemistry;
37
the final conjugated
structure has a maximal extended linker length of ∼50 Å
(
Supporting Information Figure 1B
).
We employed biotin–diazirine labeling using conditions similar
to those for μMap,
30
where the Fab-catalyst
concentration was set at 9 μM, and the biotin–diazirine
concentration at 100 μM (11-fold excess). Conjugates were illuminated
with blue light for 5 min at 25 °C in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). The extent of labeling is controlled by the concentration of
the biotin–diazirine, ratio of biotin–diazirine to protein,
and time of illumination.
We then analyzed the sites of intramolecular
biotin–carbene
labeling in three biological replicates, each with two technical replicates,
for all eight Fab-catalysts at single amino acid resolution via mass
spectrometry (
Figure
2
). Samples were digested with trypsin, with resulting peptides processed
with a Preomics mass spectrometry prep kit.
38
Tryptic peptides were injected onto a Bruker TimsTOF Pro. Data were
processed using the PEAKS informatics program.
39
The location of the individual residues was readily identified
by the presence of an additional monoisotopic mass of 616.25, corresponding
to insertion of the biotin–carbene. Given the low sample complexity
of tryptic peptides from these purified proteins, it was not necessary
to enrich the biotinylated peptides. Total coverage of peptides from
the light chain was 98.6%, and for the heavy chain was 73.9%, when
processed using a <1% FDR. While the coverage is very high, the
tryptic peptides, S140–K153, and terminal S196-G239 of the
Traz heavy chain were not detected.
Figure 2
Dependence of distance, solvent accessibility,
and residue type
for intramolecular biotin–carbene labeling for eight Fab-catalyst
probes. A. Ribbon diagram for a single Fab-catalyst (R66M
L
) where the Ir-catalyst was attached (red star). Locations of biotin–carbene
labels are shown as blue dots. B.i. Ribbon diagrams for all eight
Fab-catalysts with red stars showing the locations of the Ir-catalyst
on the Fab, with specific mutation site indicated below. ii. Blue
bars show a histogram for the Cα-to-Cα distance from the
Ir-catalyst to sites of carbene labeling, compiled for all eight Fab-catalysts.
Note the Gaussian shape centered at 30–40 Å, and that
labeling extends to the 65 Å limit of the Fab’s longest
dimension. Green bars show a histogram for Cα-to-Cα distance
from the Ir-catalyst to all amino acids in the Fab. Individual plots
for each emitter are available in
Supporting Information Figure 2
D. C. SASA values (calculated by the Shrake–Rupley
algorithm) for the labeled residues identified in all experiments
(blue bars) and total residues of Traz (green bars). The ratio of
green to blue is relatively consistent, suggesting that labeling can
occur if residue is partially or fully exposed. Due to the small size
of Traz, every residue has some solvent accessibility. D. Normalized
frequency of carbene labeling for the 20 amino acids, with a dotted
line noting a 1:1 ratio. Normalization was accomplished by taking
the unique carbene labels onto each amino acid, divided by the frequency
of that specific amino acid present in Traz. Correcting for greater
occurrence of certain amino acids on Traz resulting in values over
1.0. The data suggest labeling is somewhat uniform.
Each Fab-catalyst was covalently labeled with the
biotin–containing
probe at an average of 74 individual sites (± 10), out of about
434 amino acid positions possible in the combined light and heavy
chain. The precise sites of self-labeling were mapped onto the structure
of the Fab-catalysts (
Figure
2
A;
Supporting Information Figure 2
C,D). There was a large degree of overlap for the labeling patterns
for the eight Fab-catalysts, although each was unique, as seen by
the Venn diagrams in
Supporting Information Figure 2
B.
From inspection of the crystal structure of Traz,
33
we determined the Cα to Cα distance
from the
methionine containing the Ir-catalyst to each biotin–carbene
labeled amino acid for all of the eight Fab-catalysts (blue bar graph
shown in
Figure
2
B).
Summing the number of labels at each distance (based on ∼500
total observations) produced a Gaussian distribution centered around
30–40 Å. We compared this to a plot of the distances between
the conjugated site and all residues (labeled or not) shown by the
green bar graph overlaid in
Figure
2
B. This plot reflects the opportunity to label and
shows a remarkably similar Gaussian distribution centered around 30–40
Å. If we then take the ratio of these two, for each distance
position, this produced a rather flat plot that extends to the very
edge of the Fab at 65 Å. The decrease in labeling at the lower
and higher angstrom distances matches the lower number of potential
sites for labeling. We interpret this to mean that labeling potential
is rather uniform up to the limit of the Fab, ∼65 Å.
We next analyzed the normalized frequency of labeling by amino
acid type (
Figure
2
D). In aggregate, the labeling was broadly distributed across amino
acid types, and the labeling ratio varied only about ±2-fold
from the mean. There are ∼20 residues that are almost entirely
buried in the Fab, for which we did not see labeling, including all
Ile and Met, which explains their lack of representation. We next
determined how solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) correlated with
biotin–carbene labeling using standard Shrake–Rupley
solvent accessibility calculations
40
(
Figure
2
C). We found that
carbene labeling could occur at all residues from partial to complete
exposure (green bars), and this mirrored the average distribution
of SASA for residues in the Fab (blue bars). Interestingly, we found
partially buried residues had increased labeling frequency of carbene
labeling possibly because they are more protected from competing hydrolysis.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that there is little bias for
the residue type that is labeled, so long as they are partially solvent
accessible and that labeling is rather uniform to the edge of the
Fab.
Analysis of Intermolecular Labeling from Fab-Catalysts to HER2
in the Complex
To evaluate the biotin–carbene labeling
patterns for the Fab-catalysts in complex with the purified ecto-domain
of HER2, we mixed them 1:1 (9 μM each) and then conducted the
biotin–diazirine photolabeling. Given the high affinity of
the Traz Fab for HER2 (
K
D
∼ 2 nM),
41
we predicted that >95% of partners should
be
in a 1:1 steady-state complex. The mass spectrometry workup and analysis
was the same as for the Fab-catalyst self-labeling experiment above.
We evaluated how the self-labeling patterns for the Fab-catalysts
changed when bound. The Fab-catalysts showed lower extents of self-labeling,
with an average of 55 sites (±11) when bound to HER2, compared
to an average of 74 sites (±10) when free. Some of this reduction
may be because the HER2 complex is consuming available carbenes, which
could then be limiting. In addition, we see evidence that the CDRs
can be partially protected from labeling when bound to HER2, as shown
for the R66M
L
Fab-catalyst in
Figure
3
A.
Figure 3
Intermolecular biotin–carbene labeling
from Fab-catalyst
in complex with HER2. A. Example of biotin–carbene labeling
of HER2 using the R66M
L
Fab catalyst. HER2 is rendered
in cyan ribbons, and Cα positions labeled are shown as orange
spheres. The example R66M
L
Fab-catalyst is shown in gray
and teal ribbons, with the site of the Ir-catalyst shown as a red
star. B. The total Cα-to-Cα distance distribution plot
for intramolecular and intermolecular labeling, compiled for all eight
Fab–HER2 complexes, showing the labeling of the Fab-catalysts
(blue bars) and HER2 (orange bars). Labeling is graphed by enrichment
calculated by Skyline. C. Enrichment of labeled residues at each distance
from the Ir-catalyst, taken as the average of enrichment at each angstrom
distance.
We next analyzed the intermolecular labeling patterns
on HER2.
Peptide coverage for HER2 averaged 52% with FDRs < 1%; the “neck”
region of HER2 is highly hydrophobic and poorly cleaved by Trypsin/LysC,
likely explaining why peptides from this region were not resolved
by MS (red ribbons in
Figure
3
B). Each Fab-catalyst labeled between 11 to 28 sites on HER2,
with an average of 16 sites (±12). The Fab-catalysts labeled
many of the same sites on HER2 as shown by Venn diagrams in
Supporting Information Figure 3A,B
, but each
had a unique labeling pattern; this is not surprising given their
different locations.
Next, we determined the distance dependence
of labeling for the
complex, both intramolecular labeling of the Fab-catalyst alone, and
intermolecular labeling of the Fab-catalyst complexed to HER2 (
Figure
3
C). For HER2, we
see about 10 times lower intensity of labeling than for the self-labeling
by the Fab-catalyst. The labeling on HER2 extends from as close as
∼20 Å from the closest Fab-catalyst to ∼110 Å
to the most distal. The furthest labeling distance possible on HER2
is ∼120 Å.
We analyzed the extent of labeling versus
distance from the Ir-catalyst
for all eight complexes. For residues within ∼80 Å of
their most distant catalyst site, the extent of labeling from different
catalysts was very similar and generally flat ≥ (
Supporting Information Figure 4
). However, for
those sites with catalysts further than 100 Å from the carbene
labeled site, there was a sharp drop-off in extent of labeling for
the more distal residues consistent with a maximum labeling near ∼110
Å.
Labeling of HER2 and Its Neighborhood on SKBR3 Cells
We next tested the ability of each of the eight Fab-catalysts to
label HER2 and neighbors on a well-characterized breast cancer-derived
cell line, SKBR3, where HER2 is overexpressed (1.6 million receptors
per cell), leading to constitutive self-activation.
36
Each of the eight Fab-catalysts were added, at 5 μg/mL
(120 nM), to 5 million SKBR3 cells for 30 min at 4 °C.
Excess Fab was quickly washed away followed by labeling with 100 μM
diazirine–biotin for 10 min of blue light exposure. We deliberately
chose 4 °C because it is below the lipid fluid phase transition,
thus effectively quenching any further trafficking or diffusion on
the membrane. Following labeling, cells were washed and lysed to capture
biotinylated proteins to be analyzed by mass spectrometry. Each Fab-catalyst
sample was analyzed in biological triplicate and technical duplicate.
Maxquant was used for processing on-cell experiments, with Perseus
used for further analysis. Each Fab-catalyst alone captured an average
of 356 proteins (±21) (
Supporting Information Table 3
). Together, the eight catalysts captured 742 proteins
with ≥2 unique peptide per protein identified. About 90% of
captured proteins were annotated to be plasma membrane proteins based
upon combination of SwissProt GOCC Plasma membrane and Uniprot databases
(
Supporting Information Figure 5
).
To rigorously compare proteins specifically labeled by the Fab-catalysts
on the cell surface, we engineered a nonspecific membrane catalyst
through conjugation of the Ir-catalyst to a membrane anchored fatty
acid. Five million SKBR3 cells containing the FA-catalyst were analyzed
in biological triplicate with two technical replicates as above. The
FA-catalyst identified a total of 787 proteins with high confidence
(false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%) (
Supporting Information Table 1
).
To further validate the FA-catalyst’s
ability to act as
a less biased surfaceome control, we compared its labeling pattern
to the well-established method of cell surface capture (CSC). The
CSC approach captures the glycoprotein population of the cell surface,
representing ∼85% of membrane proteins.
2
Using the same number of cells, we identified 543 proteins by CSC,
with a standard deviation (SD) of 0.39 log2x units between biologic
replicates, compared to 787 proteins found by the FA-catalyst with
an SD of 0.32 SD. There was substantial overlap with proteins identified
by the FA-catalyst and CSC in both quantity and proteins identified
(
Supporting Information Figure 8
;
Supporting Information Table 1
). The small differences
we find are likely due to the different cell surface labeling methods:
the FA-catalyst labels anything within ∼110 Å, while CSC
is restricted to glycoproteins. Taken together, we believe this data
validates the FA-catalyst for use in cell surfaceome labeling. Importantly,
it allows us to compare methods (Fab vs FA) that utilize the same
Ir-based catalyst bound to the cell membrane proteins or lipid bilayer,
respectively.
Next, we sought to compare our site-specific Fab-catalyst
with
the nonspecific NHS labeling of the original μMap method.
30
The μMap method used a mouse Fc secondary
antibody labeled with roughly 6–8 Ir-catalysts. We produced
this and tested labeling from solution as described in the μMap
method and identified only about 150 proteins with SD of 0.67, compared
to 787 proteins for the FA-catalyst and an SD of 0.32 (
Supporting Information Table 1
). Virtually all
of the 150 proteins identified by the secondary IgG-catalyst control
were identified in the FA-catalyst control as shown by the Venn diagram
(
Supporting Information Figure 5
C). These
data support that the FA-catalyst more rigorously controls for nonspecific
membrane labeling of Fab-catalysts on the membrane than a solution
borne antibody catalyst control.
We next analyzed labeling from
the single-catalyst Fabs for the
proteins that were enriched by proximity labeling. Remarkably, there
was near complete overlap for the sum of all proteins detected at
any level by each of the eight Fab-catalysts and the FA-catalyst (
Figure
4
Ai and 4Aii). We
next quantitatively compared the protein-specific fold enrichment
values for each Fab-catalyst’s labeling versus the FA-catalyst
control (
Figure
4
B).
Proteins were filtered for those with at least three LFQ values in
either one of the Fab-catalyst site mutants or in the FA-catalyst
control. Combining data for all eight site-specific Traz Fabs gave
higher confidence identifications, with 457 total proteins remaining
in the data set after screening. Furthermore, a larger Maxquant run
of 48 experiments identified more peptides for LFQ quantification,
increasing the LFQ values with greater total ID’s.
Figure 4
Proteins identified
on SKBR3 cells for the eight Fab-catalysts
and the secondary antibody-catalyst, compared to nonspecific membrane
labeling using the FA-catalyst. A.i. Venn diagram showing the overlap
for all high confidence identified proteins identified in FA-catalyst
and Fab-catalyst experiments. All high confidence proteins identified
in the eight Fab-catalysts were detected at some level in the FA-catalyst
experiment. ii. Venn diagram showing the overlap of identified proteins
with LFQ values. B. Hierarchical clustering and heat map of the top
50 most enriched proteins for the Fab-catalysts (lanes 2–9),
relative to FA-catalyst (lane 1). LFQ values for each protein are
normalized within the Fab samples. Non-normalized plots are available
in
Supporting Information Figure 8
. C.
Volcano plot for R66M
L
Fab-catalyst labeling processed
together with all eight Fab-catalysts. Proteins enriched greater than
4 log2x units over the FA-catalyst are labeled. D. G181M
H
Fab-catalyst labeling processed identically to the R66M
L
, showing proteins enriched greater than 4 log2x over the FA-catalyst.
E. Mean enrichment of the eight Fab-catalysts plotted against the
mean FA-catalyst enrichment levels. Proteins most enriched over FA-catalyst
background are highlighted across a range of LFQ values. The overall
range of LFQ values likely reflects differences in protein abundance.
Proteins that fall furthest off the unity line are likely HER2 neighbors.
Not surprisingly, the three most highly enriched hits derive from
HER2 and the Fab-catalyst light and heavy chains. F. Volcano plot
showing fold enrichment for proteins labeled with the secondary antibody
binding to Traz, relative to the FA-catalyst. Note there were only
nine high-confidence identifications, and only four that were enriched
over 2.5 log2x over the FA-catalyst control, including HER2. G. A
comparable volcano plot showing fold enrichment for proteins labeled
with the R66M
L
Fab-catalyst, compared against the FA-catalyst
control. Note there were 22 high-confidence identifications of which
9 proteins were enriched over 2.5 log2x over the FA control. H. Venn
diagram showing overlap of highly enriched proteins observed in all
eight Fab-catalysts, compared to those in the R66M
L
-only
data set and the secondary antibody-catalyst data set. I. List of
eight Fab-catalysts and total number of proteins seen enriched for
each by more than 2.5 log2x relative to the FA-control.
We further analyzed the top 50 proteins with the
highest enrichment
values in the Fab-catalysts, by generating a heat map with hierarchical
clustering (
Figure
4
B). The heat map clearly distinguishes the group of eight Fab-catalysts
from the FA-catalyst. In detail, each Fab-catalyst is somewhat different,
likely reflecting the different sites for the Ir-catalyst. We also
present enrichment differences between Fab-catalyst and FA-catalysts
by classic volcano plots (
Supporting Information Figure 7
). We combined the data sets for the Fab-catalysts
to increase the statistical confidence of targets. This allowed less
enriched hits to emerge relative to the FA-catalyst control.
Figure
4
C,D shows example
volcano plots for two of the Fab-catalysts, R66M
L
and G181M
H
, which are furthest from each other on the Fab and show the
greatest spread of differences.
Mean LFQ values from all Fab-catalysts
were graphed against mean
LFQ values for each FA-catalyst to determine enrichment (
Figure
4
E). Results demonstrate
that across the entire range of LFQ values, specific proteins were
selectively enriched by the Fab-catalysts against FA-control. The
proteins labeled are those that are substantially and consistently
enriched among the eight Fab-catalysts. As expected, ERBB2 (HER2)
and the primary antibody light and heavy chains from the Fab-catalysts
are among the most abundant and enriched proteins.
We then sought
to compare our site-specific labeled primary Fab-catalyst
to the nonspecific labeled secondary antibody approach described in
μMap. We produced a comparable secondary antibody catalyst probe
labeled with roughly six to eight catalysts, which was then added
to cells prebound with Traz. Samples were analyzed in biological triplicate
and technical duplicate and processed using the same methods described
for the Fab-catalysts (
Supporting Information Table 3
). In total, the secondary antibody catalyst detected
334 proteins (<1% FDR), with nine proteins significantly enriched
over background and only five seen >2.5 log2x enriched including
the
HER2 and the Traz antibody (
Figure
4
F;
Supporting Information Figure 6
). By comparison, we found 16 proteins enriched in the R66M
L
Fab-catalyst by >2.5 log2x, including virtually all those
found in the targeted secondary antibody catalyst experiment (
Figure
4
H). These data indicate
that site-specific catalyst attachment can provide higher resolution
on cells than the multisite NHS labeled secondary antibody catalyst.
Comparing volcano plots for all eight of the Fab-catalysts (
Supporting Information Figure 7
), we see each
Fab-catalyst has between 20 to 40 proteins enriched over 2.5 log2x,
relative to the FA-catalyst (
Figure
4
H). A Venn diagram of these highly enriched proteins
shows each Fab-catalyst has a unique pattern (
Supporting Information Figure 7
), but we identify 16 proteins
that are commonly labeled by four or more Fab-catalysts (
Supporting Information Figure 7
).
Of the
proteins consistently highly enriched, the majority are
known to be secreted or membrane proteins, with 61 of 79 being assigned
to the membrane in the GO database (
Supporting Information Figure 7
D). String analysis shows that 71 of 88
proteins are known to have functional links to HER2 (
Supporting Information Figure 6
D,E;
Supporting Information Table 4
). We have further tabulated the common
hits with the greatest amount of literature associated with HER2 biology
or breast cancer (
Table
1
).
Table 1
Selected Examples of Neighbors, Highlighted
for Relevancy to Her2+ Cancer or HER2 Signaling
MS ID
protein name
potential
relevance to Her2+ cancer
CAN1
calpain-1
a protease linked to numerous
disease states, specifically
tumor migration and progression
51
TGFR1
TGF-beta receptor type-1
a signaling protein linked to inhibition of early cancer progression,
however in late cancer progression is associated with increasing tumorigenicity
and invasiveness
52
PTPRF
receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase F
a phosphatase which regulates
signaling at cell–cell
junctions; overexpression has been implicated in decreased survival
in prostate cancer
53
BCAM
basal cell adhesion molecule
an adhesion protein which through not fully established pathways
has been linked to tumor progression, size, and negative survival
rates
54
ENOA
alpha-enolase
a glycolytic enzyme which is known
to have a secondary role
in cancers as a cell surface receptor increasing tumorgenicity
55
Discussion
Single-Site
In Vitro
Experiments Allow Structure-Based
Calibration of the Carbene PLP Labeling Technology at Single Residue
Resolution
The recent development of μMap technology
has opened exciting opportunities for higher resolution and higher
confidence identification of protein partners on cells. In addition
to better defining protein complexes
in situ
, we
believe the technology has the theoretical potential to help provide
structural information for protein complexes
in vitro
, much like spectroscopic methods such as fluorescence energy transfer
(FRET) or chemical cross-linking.
28
Thus,
we focused on calibrating labeling distances and residues
in vitro
within the structurally well-defined Traz–HER2
complex using site-specific Ir-catalyst conjugation. We quantified
sites of carbene labeling at single amino acid resolution from simple
tryptic peptide mixtures without the need for biotin enrichment.
From intramolecular experiments on the site-specific Fab-catalysts,
we found that virtually all amino acids can be labeled, as anticipated
from the known chemistry of highly reactive carbenes.
42
However, some systematic variations were context dependent.
Such generally broad amino acid coverage allows labeling of many sites,
thus increasing the sensitivity of detection. Other PLP methods that
generate hydroxy radicals or reactive biotin–AMP are inherently
less sensitive, as they react predominantly with tyrosine/tryptophan
and lysines, respectively. About 20 highly buried residues were not
labeled in the Traz-Fab, including Met and Ile. When correlated with
SASA, we found that as long as an amino acid showed some exposure,
it could be labeled.
With techniques to measure distances at
the molecular scale, such
as fluorescence energy transfer (FRET), nuclear Overhauser effects
(NOE) using NMR, and paramagnetic probes using EPR,
43
−
45
it is critical
to empirically calibrate the distance dependence of effects on structurally
defined sites with model systems. We applied the same reasoning to
DET labeling here using intramolecular labeling of single-site defined
Fabs and intermolecular labeling to its HER2 binding partner. Empirically,
we see that labeling was rather uniform out to ∼110 Å.
However, unlike FRET and NOE, we see considerable noise in the distance
dependence of labeling. We hypothesize that this is due to reaction
efficiency, differences in how labeled peptides fly in the MS, and
incomplete peptide coverage. Nonetheless, the broad and somewhat uniform
amino acid coverage, the simplicity of MS analysis, and the availability
of recombinant antibodies to many disease targets potentially can
provide a useful and orthogonal information to use for structural
characterization, even in complex samples.
The DET process involves
an electron transfer from the triplet
excited state on the Ir-catalyst to the strained three-member ring
of the diazirine within about 10 Å.
46
Once the carbene is triggered, it can diffuse around 40 Å
47
before it is quenched by water (given the half-life
of the carbene in water of 7 ns). In our system, the Ir-catalyst is
on a ∼50 Å leash from the Cα of the Met on the Fab-catalyst
(estimated by Avogadro
48
). By summing the
distance, diffusion, and leash length, we would theoretically expect
a labeling distance radius that is strongest at approximately 70 Å
and a possible extreme distance of around 110 Å, which closely
matches our measurements (
Figure
5
). Additional factors not captured here could include
the dynamics of the leash and the protein, the potential binding of
the Ir-chelate as it surveys the protein surface, and finally exclusion
from penetrating the protein itself. All these factors should affect
sites that are labeled, which is why it is critical to empirically
determine distance relationships. Previous estimates using stimulated-emission
depletion microscopy (STED)
27
and three
different constructs provided very useful distance ranges for biotin–carbene
labeling for the μMap format
30
of
570 ±120 Å, 540 ± 120 Å, and 570± 120 Å.
If we overlay the estimates we have made upon the primary and secondary
antibody format, the system used in Oakely et al.,
27
which used a streptavidin–fluorophore conjugate
for detection, we can rationalize the ∼550 Å range reported.
They also noted that the large system would extend the range of the
carbene labeling due to the size of these antibody–target–streptavidin
complexes.
Figure 5
A. A cartoon schematic of the radial labeling distances estimated,
compared to experimental measurements. Theoretical distances are represented
by the trio of determinants: a ∼10 Å distance for the
DET process between the photocatalyst and diazirine, a ∼40–50
Å diffusion limit for carbenes in water, and a ∼40–50
Å leash from the Ir-catalyst to the Cα attachment site
on the protein. These roughly match our maximum experimentally derived
distances of ∼110 Å. B. A schematic of this model applied
to a secondary antibody system with approximate distances. This total
distance agrees with the previously observed labeling distance of
this complex of 540 ± 120 Å.
On-Cell Labeling with Single-Site Fab-Catalysts Revealed New
Members of Signaling Active HER2 Neighborhoods with Higher Resolution
and Higher Confidence
The Fab derived from Traz is a small
protein (∼50 kDa) and does not perturb signaling. This allowed
us to probe the active HER2 neighborhood in HER2-overexpressing cells,
such as SKBR3 cells. We sought to establish whether single-site catalyst
Fabs would perform better with a smaller radius of labeling compared
to the μMap method, in terms of number and confidence of identifications
and sensitivity for high and low abundance partners. To determine
the specificity of labeling, we hypothesized that a nonspecific FA-tethered
catalyst would more accurately sample the membrane protein background.
Membrane tethering of enzymes has been shown to dramatically improve
the depth of engaging membrane proteins by a sialidase,
49
a peroxidase,
50
or
subtiligase,
12
by more than 20-fold. Thus,
we created a general membrane-anchored catalyst probe through attachment
of the Ir-catalyst to a metabolically incorporated FA-catalyst. The
FA-catalyst produced comparable and even slightly higher numbers of
identifications compared to traditional CSC methods for surfaceomics
8
(between 600 and 1000 membrane proteins in a
typical data set). By comparing the Fab-catalysts to the FA-catalyst,
we identified about two dozen highly enriched partners (>2.5 log2x)
with high confidence for the Fab-catalyst probe (R66M
L
),
while only four were labeled when the photocatalyst was attached to
using the secondary antibody μMap. We believe this reflects
closer labeling from a single-site primary Fab-catalysts that is positioned
much closer to the HER2 target. The Fab-catalyst and FA-catalyst labeled
largely the same ∼800 proteins on the cell, though significantly
differing in LFQ values as seen by the enrichment values and volcano
plots. Bringing the photocatalyst directly against the target allowed
better enrichment of the partners that interact with HER2.
All
eight of the Fab-catalysts produced somewhat unique collections
of two to three dozen high-confidence hits reflecting their different
vantage points in labeling the neighborhoods. Interestingly, we find
different locations of the Ir-emitter yield overlapping proteins,
but with some differences in the highly enriched neighbors. Not surprisingly
the data suggest different positions of the emitter on the antibody
can affect the specific observed neighbors. We doubt that all these
proteins form one large complex with HER2, but likely reflect a number
of complexes. Most of these have not been reported to bind with HER2
directly, but the majority have functional links to HER2 by STRING
analysis. To highlight examples of neighbors that can be identified
we list a common set of neighboring proteins identified from the eight
catalyst sites, with known functional links to HER2 as shown in a
STRING analysis (
Table
1
,
SI Table 4
). These candidate interacting
proteins will require more detailed cellular experiments to validate
a structural and functional role with HER2.
Conclusions
The single-site Fab-catalyst probes help
to calibrate the distance
resolution of carbene labeling. Our studies demonstrate the broad
breadth of residue-specific labeling and validate increased resolution
and sensitivity for site-specific attachment on the primary antibody.
It is relatively simple to create single-site catalysts to other binding
proteins, which may be useful for assisting in characterizing structures
and stoichiometries of protein complexes in vitro and on cells. Single-site
catalyst probes allow one site to label surrounding proteins in a
distance-restricted fashion. In addition, it should be possible to
increase and decrease the resolution by using catalysts with shorter
or longer leashes, or by switching out the reactive intermediate used.
For example, recently it has been shown
27
that photocatalytic triggering of different phenyl azides to generate
reactive nitrenes in μMap format increased labeling from 700
to1200 Å, and with phenols up to ∼3000 Å. Given the
abundance of recombinant proteins and antibodies, we believe single-site
conjugated binding proteins, coupled with nonspecific FA-catalyst
controls, will increase the confidence and spatial resolution for
transient protein interactomics.