INTRODUCTION
In polarized cells such as neurons, intestinal epithelial cells, or cells of
the early fly embryo, the majority of mRNAs have a distinct spatial localization
pattern.
1
–
5
mRNA localization enables the local control
of protein production.
6
–
8
In non-polarized cells, mRNA
localization has primarily been studied for membrane proteins.
9
–
12
Whereas the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is established as
a major site of local protein synthesis for membrane and secretory
proteins,
9
,
10
,
13
the cytoplasm is compartmentalized by additional membrane-bound and membraneless
organelles.
14
–
17
These compartments may enable the
generation of unique biochemical translation environments, which have been suggested
to be crucial for protein interaction partner selection during protein
synthesis.
16
,
18
–
20
However, it is currently largely unknown whether the location
of protein synthesis also matters for protein output.
TIS granules (TGs) represent one such unique translation compartment, which
promotes the co-translational formation of protein complexes. Both endogenous and
overexpressed TIS11B promote the formation of specific protein complexes when mRNAs
are translated in TGs.
16
,
19
TGs are formed by the RNA-binding protein
(RBP) TIS11B, together with its bound mRNAs.
16
,
21
TIS11B
mRNA is ubiquitously expressed,
22
suggesting that TGs are widespread. TGs are
present under steady-state cultivation conditions and form a network-like structure
that is intertwined with the rough ER.
16
,
21
To investigate
the broader biological significance of TGs, we determined the mRNAs enriched in TGs,
the neighboring rough ER, and the surrounding cytosol.
Because TIS11B protein is present in cells in two states (
Figure 1A
), as soluble cytosolic protein and as
phase-separated TG network,
16
,
21
we decided to use fluorescent
particle sorting
23
to identify
TG-enriched mRNAs. We also applied fluorescent particle sorting to isolate
ER-enriched mRNAs and extracted cytosolic mRNAs using digitonin. We analyzed genes
that encode non-membrane proteins and found more than 3,600 that have transcripts
enriched in one of the three compartments. mRNAs enriched in each compartment share
similar mRNA architectures, which differ strongly between compartments.
Compartment-enriched mRNAs also differed significantly in production and degradation
rates as well as in the functional classes and expression levels of their encoded
proteins. TIS11B knockout (KO) and reporter experiments support a model by which a
combinatorial code based on mRNA architecture features, together with 3′
UTR-bound RBPs TIS11B, TIA1/ L1, and LARP4B, correlated with the compartment-biased
mRNA localization pattern. Intriguingly, we observed that redirecting cytosolic
mRNAs to the ER controls protein expression, which indicates that protein abundance
is regulated by the location of translation in the cytoplasm.
RESULTS
Approach to determine subcytoplasmic mRNA localization
We set out to identify mRNAs that are localized in non-polarized human
HEK293T cells under steady-state cultivation conditions. We focused on three
major unenclosed cytoplasmic compartments−TGs, a condensate network
formed by the RBP TIS11B, the cytosolic surface of the ER, and the soluble part
of the cytoplasm known as the cytosol (
Figure
1B
). For simplicity, we consider here the sum of the three
compartments as the universe of cytoplasmic mRNAs.
To identify TG-enriched (TG+) and ER-enriched (ER+) mRNAs, we performed
fluorescent particle sorting followed by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). To label TGs
and rough ER, we co-transfected cells with mCherry-TIS11B and GFP-SEC61B,
respectively. After flow-cytometry-based sorting of fluorescent particles, we
used confocal microscopy and western blot analysis to assess the purity of the
particles (
Figures
S1A
–
S1E
). We modestly overexpressed mCherry-TIS11B compared with its
endogenous levels (
Figure
S1C
), which resulted in approximately 30% of cells forming TGs. This
amount was chosen because 25%–30% of HEK293T cells form TGs from
endogenous TIS11B. ER particles did not contain mCherry-TIS11B. TG particles
contained GFP-SEC61B, but they contained 13-fold more mCherry-TIS11B than ER
particles (
Figures 1C
and
S1C
–
S1E
). As TGs are defined by the
presence of TIS11B,
16
we
reasoned that the strong overrepresentation of TIS11B in TG particles would
allow us to identify relative enrichments of mRNAs between the compartments.
To isolate cytosolic mRNAs, we used digitonin extraction.
24
The extracted cytosol was not
contaminated by nuclei or the ER, but it contained TIS11B, which was expected
because soluble TIS11B is known to be present in the cytosol (
Figure S1C
). We performed RNA-seq
on biological replicate samples to determine the mRNA composition in the three
fractions and focused our analysis on protein-coding mRNAs (
Figure S1F
).
mRNAs that encode membrane or secretory proteins largely localize to the ER
membrane
We investigated whether the relative mRNA transcript distribution
differs across the three compartments. For each gene, we determined a
compartment-specific localization score (LS). This score is calculated using the
reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM) value obtained in each of the
three compartments, respectively, and dividing it by the sum of the RPKM values
in all three compartments. Thus, each gene is assigned three LSs that correspond
to the fraction of its transcripts localizing to each of the three compartments:
TGs, the ER, and the cytosol.
First, we focused on mRNAs that encode membrane or secretory proteins,
which are known to be translated on the ER.
10
,
11
,
13
In line with previous analyses, we find
preferential partitioning of mRNAs encoding membrane/secretory proteins in the
ER samples (
Figure
S1G
).
10
,
11
,
13
To validate our compartment isolation method, we
compared it with datasets from three alternative isolation methods.
9
,
11
,
13
We consider
69% (N = 1,476) of membrane/secretory proteins to be enriched on the ER (
Figure S1H
;
Table S1
) and we detected
between 80% and 90% overlap between our data and previous methods (
Figures S1I
and
S1J
).
9
,
11
,
13
These results strongly support
the validity of our purification strategy for mRNAs that encode
membrane/secretory proteins.
Half of the genes that encode non-membrane proteins have a biased cytoplasmic
transcript distribution
For mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins, we observed that their LSs
were more evenly distributed across the compartments (
Figure S1G
). To identify absolute
differences in mRNA distribution, the relative size of each compartment needs to
be considered. However, this parameter is currently unknown.
Therefore, we instead calculated the relative enrichment of mRNAs within
each compartment. We considered an mRNA to be compartment-enriched if its mean
LS across biological replicates was at least 1.25-fold higher than the median LS
of the compartment samples (
Figures
1D
–
1F
). Based on this
criterion, we identified 1,246 TG+ mRNAs, 919 ER+ mRNAs, and 1,481 mRNAs
enriched in the cytosol (CY+), which were non-overlapping (
Figures 1D
–
1F
;
Table
S1
). The remaining 3,369 mRNAs were not enriched in a single
compartment and were considered to have an unbiased localization pattern (
Figures 1D
–
1F
and
S1K
). The distribution of LSs of
TG+, ER+, or CY+ mRNAs is significantly different from the LSs of mRNAs with
unbiased localization patterns (
Figures
1D
–
1F
). Because LSs
across the compartments sum to 1, an mRNA enriched in one compartment is
relatively de-enriched in the other two (
Figure S1L
). Based on this
strategy, 52% of genes that encode non-membrane proteins have transcripts that
are significantly enriched in one of the three subcytoplasmic compartments in
steady-state conditions.
As a recent study also analyzed the relative distribution of mRNA
transcripts across subcellular compartments, we compared our data with their
results.
25
Although
their dataset was generated by density gradient centrifugation in a different
cell line, the two datasets strongly agreed in a qualitative and quantitative
manner (
Figure S1M
),
suggesting that our isolation method as well as our strategy to define
compartment-enriched mRNAs are valid. As non-membrane protein-encoding mRNAs
with biased transcript distributions in the cytoplasm have not been
systematically characterized, we focused all subsequent analyses on mRNAs that
encode non-membrane proteins.
Validation of compartment-enriched mRNAs by smRNA-FISH
We further validated the mRNAs designated as compartment-enriched by
performing single-molecule RNA-fluorescence
in situ
hybridization (smRNA-FISH) on endogenous mRNAs.
26
Candidates for validation were primarily
chosen based on their respective LSs, and most ranked in the top 10% of their
respective compartments (
Table
S2
). To distinguish between TG+ and ER+ mRNAs, we performed
smRNA-FISH together with co-transfection of blue fluorescent protein
(BFP)-TIS11B and GFP-SEC61B to simultaneously visualize mRNA puncta, TGs, and
the rough ER (
Figures 1G
,
1H
, and
S2A
–
S2G
). We considered an mRNA to have
an unbiased localization pattern if its transcript distribution correlated with
compartment size. As proxy for relative compartment size, we used the areas of
the maximum projection of the fluorescent signals for each compartment and
compared them to the whole-cell area. For unbiased mRNAs, we expect that 11% of
transcripts localize to TGs and 29% of transcripts localize to the ER (
Figures 1I
and
1J
).
For 3/3 TG+ mRNAs, we observed a significant enrichment of mRNA puncta
in TGs but not on the ER (
Figures
1G
–
1J
,
S2A
,
S2B
,
S2H
, and
S2I
). For the five ER+ mRNAs
tested, the mRNA puncta of 4/5 mRNAs were significantly enriched on the ER and,
for all five, we observed a 2- to 4-fold higher fraction of mRNA puncta that
colocalized with the ER compared with TGs (
Figures
1H
–
1K
and
S2C
–
S2I
).
Cytosolic mRNAs were isolated through digitonin extraction. This means
that CY+ mRNAs localize to the soluble part of the cytoplasm and are not
attached to cytoplasmic structures, including membranes or the cytoskeleton. As
smRNA-FISH only informs on co-localization and not attachment, we validated CY+
mRNAs by performing smRNA-FISH before and after digitonin extraction and
calculated the fraction of retained mRNAs. Both TG+ and ER+ mRNAs showed more
retention than CY+ mRNAs, which were depleted by about 90% following digitonin
treatment (
Figures 1L
,
1M
, and
S3A
–
S3C
). This confirms that CY+ mRNAs
predominantly localize to the soluble part of the cytoplasm. Taken together, as
we successfully validated 10/11 mRNAs that were designated to be TG+ or ER+ or
CY+ (
Figure 1N
), we conclude that about
half (52%) of genes that encode non-membrane proteins have transcripts that are
enriched in distinct subcytoplasmic compartments.
mRNA and protein levels strongly correlate with the location of
translation
Next, we characterized the features of compartment-enriched mRNAs and
found substantial differences in their steady-state mRNA and protein levels
(
Figures 2A
,
2B
,
S4A
, and
S4B
). TG+ mRNAs have the lowest steady-state expression levels and
encode proteins with the lowest expression levels (
Figures 2A
and
2B
). To examine
whether the low mRNA levels are caused by high mRNA degradation rates, we
estimated mRNA half-lives by analyzing precision run-on sequencing (Pro-seq) and
RNA-seq data (
Figures 2C
,
2D
, and
S4C
–
S4E
).
27
,
28
Pro-seq values can be treated as transcription rates and
RNA-seq data can be viewed as a measure of RNA concentration to estimate RNA
decay rates required for a steady-state equilibrium.
28
For TG+ mRNAs, we observed that their
low steady-state levels were not primarily caused by a low mRNA stability.
Instead, these mRNAs had the lowest transcription rates, suggesting that they
are either produced at a low rate or have high cotranscriptional degradation
rates (
Figures 2C
,
2D
,
S4D
, and
S4E
).
29
CY+ mRNAs
had the highest degree of mRNA turnover, with both high production and
degradation rates (
Figures 2C
and
2D
). ER+ mRNAs encode proteins with the
highest expression levels, particularly when normalizing to their intermediate
steady-state mRNA levels (
Figures 2A
and
2B
).
We further observed that the compartment-enriched mRNAs differed
substantially in their gene architectures (
Figures
2E
–
2H
and
S4F
–
S4K
). ER+ mRNAs encode the largest
proteins, with a median size of 840 amino acids−nearly 3 times larger
than proteins encoded by CY+ mRNAs (
Figure
2E
). The difference in protein size was reflected in the large
differences in exon number and mRNA length between ER+ and CY+ mRNAs (
Figures 2F
,
S4J
, and
S4K
). The median length of ER+
mRNAs is 4,600 nucleotides (nt), whereas the median length of CY+ mRNAs is 2,000
nt. It is not surprising that CY+ mRNAs have the shortest 3′ UTRs (
Figure 2G
). TG+ mRNAs are uniquely
characterized by large coding sequence (CDS) exons, with a median size of 200 nt
compared with 133 nt for the remaining mRNAs (
Figure 2H
). Further analysis revealed that the majority of TG+ mRNAs
have gene architectures similar to
ZFP36L1
(encoding TIS11B),
which is characterized by a short first exon and a long last exon that contains
~95% of its CDS (
Figure 2I
).
Moreover, compartment-enriched mRNAs encode substantially different
functional gene classes.
30
Consistent with the low protein expression levels, TG+ mRNAs were strongly
enriched in proteins containing zinc fingers and transcription factors, which
are known to have low expression (
Figure
2J
).
31
In
contrast, ER+ mRNAs encode large and highly abundant proteins, such as
cytoskeleton-binding proteins and chromatin regulators (
Figure 2K
). CY+ mRNAs often encode smaller proteins
involved in the regulation of translation or splicing (
Figure 2L
).
TGs support active translation
TGs may constitute a specialized translation environment for nuclear
proteins that require low expression levels (
Figures 2A
,
2B
, and
2J
).
31
For evidence of active translation, we used the SunTag
system to visualize mRNAs and their nascent proteins (
Figures S3D
and
S3E
).
32
We confirmed that TGs represent a
translation environment, but the number of mRNA foci in TGs was 5-fold lower
compared with the cytosol.
16
,
19
As the proportion of mRNA
translated was similar in TGs and the cytosol (
Figures S3F
and
S3G
), our data show that TGs are
sites of active translation and that the low expression level of TG-translated
proteins is predominantly a result of their low nuclear gene expression (
Figures 2A
and
2C
).
Differential 3′ UTR binding of RBPs correlates with compartment
enrichment of mRNAs
Next, we identified the RBPs responsible for compartment enrichment of
mRNA (
Figures 1D
–
1F
). As TIS11B is the scaffold protein of
TGs,
16
we performed
used individual-nucleotide resolution UV-cross-linking and immunoprecipitation
(iCLIP) of TIS11B in HEK293T cells (
Figures S5A
and
S5B
). We confirmed that the top
binding motif of TIS11B in 3′ UTRs of mRNAs is the canonical AU-rich
element (UAUUUA) (
Figure
S5C
). We analyzed additional CLIP datasets to perform a comprehensive
analysis on localization regulators.
33
,
34
We found that
24/170 tested RBPs showed binding site enrichment in 3′ UTRs of
compartment-enriched mRNAs (
Table S4
). Through logistic regression, we identified seven RBPs
whose binding contributed most significantly to mRNA enrichment in the three
compartments. They include TIS11B, HuR, PUM2, HNRNPC, TIA1/L1, LARP4B, and
METAP2 (
Figure 3A
). As a previous CLIP
analysis showed that peaks for TIA1 and TIAL1 cannot be distinguished,
35
we used the sum of peaks from
TIA1 and TIAL1 to obtain the values for TIA1/ L1. The presence of TIS11B, HuR,
PUM2, and HNRNPC on mRNAs correlates with TG enrichment, TIA1/L1 correlates with
ER enrichment, and LARP4B or METAP2 correlates with cytosol enrichment (
Figure 3A
).
mRNA architecture features, together with RBPs, generate a combinatorial code
for subcytoplasmic mRNA localization
As 2,154 mRNAs (30.7%) that encode non-membrane proteins were not bound
by any of the seven RBPs (
Figure S5D
), we considered additional regulatory factors. Among
these mRNAs, mRNA length correlated strongly with the ER and CY LSs, but in
opposite directions, suggesting that long mRNAs associate with the ER (
Figure 3B
). Similarly, average CDS exon
length correlated strongly, and in a positive manner, with the TG LS but
negatively with the CY LS (
Figure 3B
).
Including mRNA and CDS exon length in the logistic regression identified
mRNA architecture features, together with the presence of 3′ UTR-bound
RBPs, as strong factors for compartment enrichment of mRNAs (
Figure 3C
;
Table S4
). To learn the rules for
mRNA localization to the compartments, we plotted the propensity for TG
enrichment and integrated the bound RBPs together with CDS exon length (
Figure 3D
). Binding of LARP4B/METAP2 always
decreased, whereas binding of TIS11B or long CDS exons strongly increased the
propensity of mRNA to localize to TGs. TIS11B and CDS exon length have additive
effects, as mRNAs with both features showed the strongest TG enrichment (
Figures 3D
and
3E
).
The two features that correlate best with mRNA localization to the ER
are mRNA length and 3′ UTR-bound TIA1/L1. mRNAs that combine both
features have the strongest propensity for ER localization (
Figures 3F
and
3G
). In contrast, shorter mRNAs not bound by any RBP or bound by
LARP4B/METAP2 tend to localize to the cytosol (
Figures 3G
and
3H
). Taken
together, our data suggest that subcytoplasmic mRNA localization is determined
by a combinatorial code that integrates mRNA and exon length with the presence
of RBPs (
Figures 3E
and
3G
).
TIS11B deletion changes subcytoplasmic mRNA transcript distribution
To experimentally test the proposed mRNA localization code, we generated
HEK293T cells with an inducible KO of TIS11B, isolated ER particles, and
extracted the cytosol (
Figures
S5E
and
S5F
;
Table S5
). To
examine where mRNAs designated as TG+ localize in the absence of TGs, we
identified the top 20% of mRNA localization changes to the ER and the cytosol
and intersected them with mRNAs designated as TG+ (
Figure 4A
). As only two compartments were isolated, increased mRNA
localization to the ER means decreased cytosolic localization and vice versa
(
Figure 4A
).
We did not find specific RBPs associated with the localization-changing
mRNAs because TG+ mRNAs are mostly bound by TIS11B and only a few (13% and 15%)
are LARP4B or TIA1/L1 targets (
Table S5
). However, the TG+ mRNAs that increased their cytosolic
localization upon TIS11B KO were the shortest, encoded the smallest proteins,
and had the shortest exon length (
Figures
4B
–
4E
). In contrast, TG+
mRNAs that increased their ER localization upon deletion of TIS11B were
significantly longer, encoded the largest proteins, and had longer exons (
Figure 4B
–
4E
).
These results converge on a model where features that correlate with
mRNA architecture set up a ‘‘default’’ steady-state
pattern of mRNA transcript distribution, which can be overcome or reinforced
through the binding of RBPs. Our model is consistent with the following
observations: short mRNAs with average exon length localize to TGs when bound by
TIS11B, but in the absence of TIS11B they revert to the transcript distribution
established by mRNA architecture and the remaining bound RBPs, in this case the
cytosol (
Figure 3E
). Similarly, longer TG+
mRNAs that encode the largest proteins localize to the ER upon loss of TIS11B
(
Figure 3G
). Currently, the
‘‘readers’’ of the mRNA architecture features are
unknown.
3′ UTR-bound TIAL1 promotes localization of non-membrane
protein-encoding mRNAs to the ER
We set out to investigate the influence of TIA1/L1 on mRNA localization
to the ER using TIA1/L1 double KO cells.
36
However, as reported, these cells showed a high rate of
cell death, which prevented us from obtaining high-quality particles. To
validate TIA1/ L1-dependent mRNA localization to the ER, we used the MS2
tethering system to mimic 3′ UTR-binding of TIA1/L1 (
Figure 4F
). We generated a
GFP-THAP1
reporter mRNA that contained MS2-binding sites as 3′ UTR.
37
–
39
Coexpression of mCherry-tagged MS2 coat
protein (MCP) fused to TIAL1 tethers TIAL1 to the 3′ UTR of the reporter
mRNA (
Figure 4F
). As a control,
mCherry-tagged MCP was tethered.
Coexpression of the reporter mRNA and MCP evenly distributed both MCP
protein and reporter mRNA in the cytosol (
Figures
4F
–
4H
). In contrast,
coexpression of the reporter mRNA and MCP-TIAL1 resulted in perinuclear,
reticulated expression of MCP-TIAL1, with the mRNA reporter predominantly
localizing to the rough ER (
Figures
4F
–
4H
). Colocalization
was assessed by RNA-FISH of the GFP-tagged reporter mRNA and simultaneous
visualization of the rough ER through fluorescently tagged SEC61B. We quantified
the overlap between the reporter mRNAs and the ER (
Figure 4I
). In the presence of MCP-TIAL1, we observed higher
correlation coefficients between the fluorescence intensities (
Figure 4J
). This result indicated that 3′
UTR-bound TIAL1 was sufficient to induce localization of non-membrane protein
encoding mRNAs to the rough ER surface.
3′ UTR-bound TIAL1 increases protein expression
For endogenous mRNAs, ER+ mRNAs encode the highest expressed proteins
(
Figure 2B
). Moreover, TIA1/L1-bound
mRNAs encode proteins with higher expression levels than other mRNAs (
Figure 5A
). Using our mRNA reporter (
Figure 4F
), we investigated the contribution
of TIAL1 to steady-state protein expression. We used fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) to measure GFP protein expression of the mRNA reporter, with or
without tethering of TIAL1 (
Figures S6A
–
S6C
). We observed a 3.5-fold increase in protein expression upon
3′ UTR-tethering of TIAL1 compared with tethering of MCP alone (
Figures 5B
and
5C
). Higher GFP protein expression was not caused by increased mRNA
abundance (
Figure 5D
). We confirmed TIA1/
L1-dependent protein upregulation with a second GFP reporter (
Figures S6D
–
S6F
). As TIAL1 promotes translation
of mRNAs on the ER membrane, it was unclear whether increased protein expression
was caused by TIAL1 or by a potentially unique translation environment provided
by the rough ER membrane. For example, mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins
contain 1.4-fold more ribosomes when translated on the ER membrane than when
translated in the cytosol.
40
TIAL1 cooperates with the rough ER environment to promote protein
expression
To disentangle the effects of TIAL1 and the ER membrane on protein
expression, we tethered the reporter mRNA directly to the ER surface by fusing
MCP to SEC61B, a subunit of the translocon complex in the rough ER (
Figure 5E
). This recruited the reporter mRNAs
to the ER, but only increased protein expression by 1.25-fold compared with the
tethering of MCP alone (
Figures
5F
–
5H
and
S6G
–
S6I
). This approach did not
increase mRNA abundance of the reporter (
Figure
5I
). We used a second ER localization reporter by fusing MCP to
TRAPα, a different subunit of the translocon complex, and observed a
1.5-fold increase in protein expression (
Figures S6J
–
S6M
). These results suggested that
the ER membrane environment has a significant but small stimulatory effect on
translation.
Next, we investigated whether the TIAL1-dependent increase in protein
expression is intrinsic to TIAL1 or whether it depends on its localization to
the ER membrane. We added a CAAX motif to TIAL1 to localize the TIAL1-bound mRNA
reporter to the plasma membrane instead of the ER membrane (
Figure 5J
). The CAAX signal is a prenylation motif
that efficiently localized MCP and MCP-TIAL1 to the plasma membrane (
Figure 5K
).
32
Translation of the TIAL1-bound mRNA
reporter at the plasma membrane increased protein expression by 1.8-fold (
Figures 5L
and
5M
). As translation of the TIAL1-bound reporter at the ER membrane
resulted in 2-fold higher protein expression than its translation at the plasma
membrane (
Figure 5M
), our result suggested
that TIAL1 cooperated with the environment on the rough ER membrane to promote
protein expression.
As the RBPs bound to the reporter mRNA were identical in these
experiments, our results demonstrate that the subcytoplasmic location of
translation controls steady-state protein expression levels by 2-fold when
comparing plasma and ER membranes. This relationship was also observed for
endogenous mRNAs, where TIA1/L1-bound mRNAs were associated with high protein
output in every compartment, but with the highest protein yields being observed
in the ER compartment (
Figure 5N
).
The repressive effect of cytosolic TIS11B on protein expression is overcome
by its localization to the rough ER membrane
Next, we examined whether the ER environment also promotes protein
expression of mRNAs bound by other RBPs, including TIS11B (
Figures 6A
and
6B
). In cells expressing mCherry-TIS11B fusion constructs, about 30%
form TGs at steady state (
Figures S7A
and
S7B
).
16
However,
addition of MCP to TIS11B fusion constructs resulted in limited TG formation and
predominant expression of TIS11B in the cytosol (
Figures S7A
and
S7B
). In the cytosolic state,
binding of MCP-TIS11B to the reporter mRNA repressed reporter protein expression
by 2-fold, compared with tethering of MCP alone (
Figures 6C
and
6D
). This
decrease in protein expression was partially caused by a TIS11B-dependent
decrease in mRNA level (
Figure 6E
),
consistent with previous reports that suggested that cytosolic TIS11B represses
the expression of certain cytokine and cell cycle mRNAs.
41
–
43
In contrast, fusing TIS11B to MCP-SEC61B localizes
TIS11B and the bound reporter mRNA to the rough ER (
Figures 6A
and
6B
), which overcomes the repressive effect of cytosolic TIS11B and
increases protein expression 2-fold (
Figures
6A
–
6E
). The 2-fold
increase in protein expression was recapitulated with a second reporter and
indicates that the repressive effect on protein expression mediated by cytosolic
TIS11B is overcome by translation of the TIS11B-bound mRNA on the ER (
Figures 6D
and
S7C
–
S7E
).
Model
Taken together, we observed that mRNAs that are uniquely enriched in one
of three cytoplasmic compartments differ substantially in their architectural
features, in the RBPs bound to them, and in the expression levels and functional
classes of their encoded proteins (
Figure
7
). TG+ mRNAs are characterized by the longest CDS exons and TIS11B
binding to the 3′ UTR. These mRNAs encode the lowest abundance proteins
with strong enrichment of transcription factors. In contrast, although TGs are
intertwined with the rough ER, ER+ mRNAs are the longest, are predominantly
bound by TIA1/L1, and encode highly abundant large proteins. CY+ mRNAs are the
shortest and encode small and highly abundant proteins. They are bound by
LARP4B/METAP2 and have high production and degradation rates. Through mRNA
reporters, we showed that relocation of protein synthesis from the cytosol to
the ER increases protein expression, indicating that the location of translation
influences protein output (
Figure 7
).
DISCUSSION
We determined the distribution of endogenous mRNA transcripts across three
cytoplasmic compartments, including TGs, the rough ER, and the cytosol under
steady-state conditions. Our RNA-seq results, which were validated by smRNA-FISH,
suggest that approximately half of the genes that encode non-membrane proteins have
transcripts that are uniquely enriched in one of these three cytoplasmic
compartments.
Functionally related genes are translated in unique compartments
One of our most striking findings was that within each investigated
compartment a different group of functionally related mRNAs is translated (
Figure 2
). Moreover, the compartment-enriched
mRNAs have vastly different gene architectures and are characterized by
substantially different production and degradation rates as well as the
expression levels of their encoded proteins (
Figure 2
). These features are consistent with the
compartment-enriched gene groups, indicating that the cytoplasm is strongly
partitioned into different functional and regulatory compartments that are not
enclosed by membranes.
Surprisingly, we observed that transcription factors are strongly
enriched among TG+ mRNAs (
Figure 2J
). This
unexpected result can be explained by the previous observation that
transcription factors are often present at low abundance,
31
and we found that TG+ mRNAs encode the
proteins with the lowest expression levels (
Figure
2B
). Moreover, many transcription factors have an unusual gene
architecture with longer than average coding exons. Together with TIS11B
binding, this feature correlated the strongest with mRNA enrichment in TGs
(
Figures 3C
–
3E
). Interestingly, both characteristics are
associated with features associated with low mRNA abundance levels, but whereas
TIS11B-binding correlates negatively with pre-mRNA production rates
(Spearman’s correlation coefficient R = −0.26), CDS exon length
negatively correlates with mRNA half-life (Spearman’s correlation
coefficient R = −0.34).
44
The unique gene architecture together with predominant
binding of TIS11B provides an explanation for why TGs enrich for low-abundance
mRNAs.
In contrast, ER+ mRNAs encode the largest proteins with the highest
expression levels. These include helicases, cytoskeleton-bound proteins, and
chromatin regulators (
Figure 2
). It is
possible that anchoring of ribosomes on the ER membrane may facilitate the
protein synthesis of very large proteins. Moreover, it is notable that, despite
the intertwinement of TGs and the rough ER, the compartment-enriched mRNAs
encode proteins that differ substantially in their expression levels and which
are the lowest for TG+ mRNAs and the highest for ER+ mRNAs.
It was previously shown that localization to the ER membrane of certain
non-membrane protein encoding mRNAs increases their translation,
9
,
40
and we confirmed this result. In addition, we describe
a so far undescribed role for TIAL1 in the regulation of translation, as TIAL1
binding substantially increased mRNA translation (
Figure 5C
). So far, TIA1 and TIAL1 have mostly been described as
regulators of pre-mRNA splicing and as translational repressors in the context
of cellular stress, where they assemble into stress granules.
45
,
46
However, in the absence of stress, TIA1/L1 has been
reported to promote polysome association, which supports our findings.
36
,
47
For both reporter mRNAs and endogenous mRNAs, we
observed that the presence of TIAL1 increased protein expression in all
compartments, but only in the context of the ER did we observe a cooperative
effect on translation (
Figures 5M
and
5N
). The factor that cooperates with TIAL1 on
the ER to upregulate translation is currently unknown. Importantly, our reporter
results demonstrate that a change in the location of protein synthesis within
the cytoplasm strongly influences protein output, indicating that a change in
mRNA localization can alter protein abundance.
Subcytoplasmic mRNA transcript distribution correlates with a combinatorial
code of mRNA architecture features and 3′ UTR-bound RBPs
RBPs play an established role in mRNA localization.
1
,
7
Additionally, we observed a strong association of mRNA architecture features
with transcript localization to the three compartments (
Figure 3C
). It is possible that mRNA length, CDS
length, and CDS exon length do not directly regulate mRNA localization but that
specific factors read-out the information. We speculate that mRNA architecture
influences messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) size, conformation, and
packaging
48
,
49
and that these biophysical features act
as additional determinants of subcytoplasmic mRNA localization. This idea is
supported by previous insights into
oskar
mRNA localization,
where the deposition of the exon junction complex, involved in mRNP
packaging,
48
,
49
was required for proper mRNA
localization in the cytoplasm.
50
We present a model for the regulation of subcytoplasmic transcript
distribution that is based on a combinatorial code generated by mRNA
architecture features together with the bound RBPs, where individual components
act in an additive manner (
Figures 3E
and
3G
). This model was tested
experimentally by analyzing the localization propensity of TG+ mRNAs upon
deletion of TIS11B. This experiment confirmed the contribution of mRNA
architecture features to mRNA localization and suggests that the binding of RBPs
overcomes the default localization pattern established by gene-intrinsic
features (
Figures 4A
–
4E
).
Is it biologically relevant if only 20% of transcripts localize to
TGs?
Based on the estimated size of TGs (
Figure
1I
), we expect that 11% of mRNA transcripts localize to TGs by
chance. Using smRNA-FISH on TG+ mRNAs, we observed a 2-fold enrichment in TGs,
meaning that, on average, 22% of these transcripts localize to TGs. This raises
the important question of whether it matters biologically if a minority
population of transcripts for a given mRNA localizes to a certain
compartment.
This question was addressed in a follow-up project, where we
investigated the biological consequences of
MYC
mRNA, which is
a TG+ mRNA, when it was translated in TGs or the cytosol.
19
We observed that several MYC protein
complexes were only formed when
MYC
mRNA was translated in TGs
and not when it was translated in the cytosol. The TG-dependent protein
complexes formed co-translationally and had functional consequences for MYC
target gene expression in the nucleus. TG-translated MYC induced different
target genes than cytosol-translated MYC.
19
Our results indicate biological relevance, even when
only a fraction of transcripts are translated in TGs.
In summary, our study revealed a surprisingly high degree of cytoplasmic
compartmentalization. This is the basis for the translation of functionally
related proteins in defined environments that strongly affect mRNA and protein
expression. Our results highlight the contribution of spatial regulation, whose
consequences go beyond the effects mediated by the mRNA-bound proteins. In the
future, our findings may provide the basis for biotechnology applications that
make use of engineered 3′ UTR sequences to boost protein expression in
experimental settings or to increase protein production of mRNA vaccines.
Limitations of the study
The exact compartment sizes of TGs, the rough ER, and the cytosol are
currently unknown and can only be estimated. However, compartment-enriched mRNAs
were identified using two different methods, which yielded highly similar
results.
To obtain sufficient material for TG and ER particle sorting, we used
transfected, fluorescently labeled proteins instead of endogenous proteins. We
did not knock down TIS11B or SEC61B, as overexpression had minimal effects on
the transcriptome, while the knockdown of TIS11B changed the abundance of
thousands of transcripts. In the future, TG particle sorting may be possible
using endogenous, fluorescently tagged TIS11B in cells with high TIS11B
expression.
The use of spike-ins to isolated compartments obtained from defined cell
numbers may have enabled us to perform absolute, versus the relative, enrichment
analyses that we report here. Moreover, all analyses were performed at the gene
level. Alternative 3′ UTR isoforms are known to differentially localize
and, therefore, we would expect to obtain a higher resolution for compartment
enrichment of transcripts if, instead of genes, alternative 3′ UTR
isoforms had been analyzed.
38
,
51
However, with our purification
strategy we did not obtain sufficient mRNA quantities to perform the study at
the level of alternative 3′ UTRs.
STAR★METHODS
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should
be directed to and will be fulfilled by the
lead contact
, Christine Mayr
(
mayrc@mskcc.org
).
Materials availability
Plasmids generated in this study have been deposited to
Addgene.
Plasmids generated in this study not available at Addgene
are available from the
lead
contact
.
The TIS11B inducible knockout HEK293T cell line (together
with the control cell line) generated in this study are available
from the
lead contact
with a
completed Materials Transfer Agreement.
Data and code availability
The data of the proteomics experiment were deposited in the
MassIVE repository (dataset identifier: MSV000092176). The RNA-seq
samples obtained from the subcytoplasmic fractionation and the
TIS11B iCLIP data obtained from HEK293T cells are available at GEO
(Accession number:
GSE215770
). The code for logistic regression is
available on Zenodo (
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10056230
). Western
blot data, raw imaging data and scripts for analysis are deposited
at Mendeley (
https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/nmt7ppsp8r/1
).
All original code has been deposited at Zenodo and is
publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in
the
key resources table
.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data
reported in this paper is available from the
lead contact
upon request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Cell lines
HEK293T (human immortalized embryonic kidney cells, female origin)
was purchased from ATCC. HeLa, a human cervical cancer cell line (female
origin), was a gift from the lab of Jonathan S. Weissman (UCSF), provided by
Calvin H. Jan. All cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2
injection in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 4,500
mg/L glucose, 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin
and 100 μg/ml streptomycin.
Generation of a doxycycline inducible
TIS11B
knockout
cell line (
TIS11B
KO)
Doxycycline inducible Cas9 (iCas9) HEK293T cells were generated by
infecting cells with lentivirus containing a Cas9-P2A-GFP expression
cassette under a doxycycline inducible promoter as described
previously.
53
During consecutive rounds of fluorescence-activated cell sorting, we
selected a cell pool exhibiting robust induction of Cas9/GFP expression
after doxycycline treatment (100 ng/ml for 24 hours), and low levels of
leaky transgene expression in the absence of the drug. Next, we transduced
iCas9 cell lines with a lentiviral construct harboring a pair of guide RNAs
either targeting
TIS11B
or gRNAs that target an intergenic
region. To generate these constructs, we adapted the plentiGuide-puro
vector.
54
to
incorporate a second guide RNA expression cassette as described
previously.
55
For
this purpose, the plasmid was digested with BsmBI (FastDigest Esp3I, Thermo
Fisher Scientific) and a synthetic 391 bp double-stranded DNA fragment
encoding 5′-(1st gRNA/scaffold/H1 promoter/2nd gRNA)-3′ was
inserted using the NEBuilder HiFi assembly system (NEB). Synthetic DNA
fragments were ordered from Genewiz and sequences are listed in
Table S6
. The
assembled vector DNA was used to transform chemically competent Stbl3
bacteria cells (Invitrogen), and correct vector clones were identified by
Sanger sequencing.
Lentivirus was generated in HEK293T cells using standard methods and
200 μl of viral supernatant was used to transduce iCas9 cells in a
6-well dish together with 8 μg/ml polybrene. Transduced cells were
subjected to puromycin selection (1 μg/ml) for five days and
resistant cells were aliquoted and frozen for all further experiments.
Finally, for induction of gene knockouts,
TIS11B
KO and
corresponding control cells (with gRNAs targeting an intergenic region) were
treated with doxycycline (100 ng/ml) for five days, after which TIS11B
protein expression was evaluated by western blotting, ER particle sorting
and digitonin extraction was performed.
METHOD DETAILS
Constructs
Fluorescently-tagged TIS11B and SEC61B constructs
The eGFP/mCherry/BFP fusion constructs for TIS11B and SEC61B
expression were described previously.
16
They were generated in the
pcDNA3.1-puro expression vector. The TIS11B and SEC61B coding regions
were PCR amplified from HeLa cDNA and inserted downstream of
eGFP/mCherry/BFP using BsrGI/EcoRI or BsrGI/HindIII restriction sites,
respectively.
Constructs to generate the mRNA localization reporter
To investigate the influence of RBPs on mRNA localization of a
GFP mRNA reporter, RBPs were fused to MCP and tethered to a GFP mRNA
reporter containing MS2 binding sites as 3′UTR.
37
,
38
To investigate mRNA
localization-dependent protein expression of the GFP mRNA reporter, a
CAAX sequence was fused to MCP or to MCP-RBP fusions.
GFP mRNA reporter
To generate the GFP mRNA reporter, the
GFP-BIRC3-MS2-SU
39
vector was used the BIRC3 coding region was
replaced with the THAP1 coding region. It was PCR amplified from the
GFP-THAP1 vector using THAP1-MS2 F and THAP1-MS2 R primers and inserted
between the BsrGI and AgeI sites. The SU fragment was removed with
HindIII and XhoI and blunt end ligated, resulting in GFP-THAP1-MS2.
MCP-mCherry RBP fusion constructs
To generate MCP-mCherry, the MCP coding sequence was PCR
amplified from UBC NLS-HA-2XMCP-tagRFPt vector (Addgene 64541) using MCP
F and MCP R primers and inserted in-frame, upstream of mCherry (mCherry
lacking a start codon) between BmtI and BamHI sites in
pcDNA3.1-puro-mCherry vector.
16
,
52
To
generate MCP-mCherry-TIS11B and MCP-mCherry-TIAL1, their coding
sequences were inserted in-frame, downstream of mCherry between the
BsrGI and XbaI sites. The TIS11B coding sequence was amplified from
pcDNA3.1-puro-GFP-TIS11B using TIS11B MCP F and TIS11B MCP R primers and
the TIAL1 coding sequence was PCR amplified from pFRT_TO_FlagHA_TIAL1
(Addgene 106090) using TIAL1 MCP F and TIAL1 MCP R primers.
MCP-mCherry fusion constructs with subcellular localization
signals
To generate pcDNA3.1-puro-MCP-mCherry-SEC61B, the MCP-mCherry
coding sequence was cut from MCP-mCherry vector using BmtI and BsrGI and
pasted in-frame, upstream of SEC61B in pcDNA3.1-mCherry-SEC61B
(replacing mCherry). To generate the TIS11B-MCP-mCherry-SEC61B vector,
TIS11B coding sequence was PCR amplified from pcDNA3.1-puro-GFP-TIS11B
using TIS-SEC F and TIS-SEC R primers and pasted in-frame, upstream of
MCP into the BmtI site in the MCP-mCherry-SEC61B vector. To generate
TRAPα-MCP-mCherry, the TRAPα coding sequence (encoded by
the
SSR1
gene) was PCR amplified from HeLa cDNA using
TRAPα MCP F and TRAPα MCP R and inserted in-frame,
upstream of MCP in the pcDNA3.1-puro-MCP-mCherry vector.
For plasma membrane localization, the CAAX prenylation signal
was added to the C-terminus of MCP-mCherry or MCP-mCherry-TIAL1. The
CAAX coding sequence was purchased as a gene fragment from Azenta as
described
32
and PCR amplified using TIAL1 CAAX F and CAAX R primers. It was inserted
in-frame using the BsrGI and ApaI sites, located downstream of mCherry
to generate pcDNA3.1-puro-MCP-mCherry-CAAX. It was inserted in-frame
using EcoNI and ApaI sites to generate MCP-mCherry-TIAL1-CAAX.
SunTag constructs
were described
previously.
32
Isolation of subcytoplasmic compartments
Transfection
HEK293T cells were seeded in six 10 cm dishes (particle sorting)
or one well from a 6-well plate (cytosol extraction) at 80% confluency
in antibiotic free media. After 24 hours, cells were transfected by
calcium phosphate with either 3 μg mCherry-TIS11B or 1 μg
GFP-SEC61B per dish (particle sorting), or 500ng mCherry-TIS11B (cytosol
extraction). We modestly overexpress mCherry-TIS11B compared to its
endogenous levels (
Figure S1C
), which results in approximately 30% of cells to
form TGs. This amount was chosen, because 25–30% of HEK293T cells
form TG from endogenous TIS11B.
Particle purification
20 hours after transfection, cells were rinsed once with
ice-cold PBS, scraped in 10 ml ice-cold PBS, and pelleted at 300
× g. Pellets from two plates were resuspended in 1 ml ice-cold
hypotonic isolation buffer (225 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 20 mM
Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1 mM EDTA). Cells were lysed with 50 strokes in a 1
ml dounce-homogenizer with pestle on ice in order to shear the nuclei
from the ER. Nuclei were pelleted with a two-minute spin at 600 ×
g. The supernatant contains the cytoplasmic membrane fraction, which was
pelleted with a 15-minute spin at 7000 × g and resuspended in
ice-cold PBS for fluorescent particle sorting.
Fluorescent particle sorting
Particles were sorted on a BD FACSAria III cell sorter equipped
with a 70 μm nozzle. The forward-scatter threshold was decreased
from 5,000 to 800 in order to visualize subcellular particles. Particles
were first detected by fluorescence using the 594 nm and 488 nm
excitation lasers, for mCherry-TIS11B and GFP-SEC61B respectively, and
405 nm excitation laser for DAPI. A sorting gate was drawn on particles
that were either mCherry-positive or GFP-positive, but DAPI-negative, to
exclude any remaining nuclei. Sorting was performed in purity mode with
an average speed of 150 particles/second. Particles were sorted directly
into 1 ml of TRIzol solution in Eppendorf tubes, holding 180,000
particles per tube. RNA extraction was performed for each tube
separately and total RNA for each sample was combined for library
preparation. Two biological replicates for each particle prep were
sequenced. For each replicate, about 1.5 million TIS11B granule
particles and 2.0 million ER particles were collected.
Cytosol extraction
The cytosol was extracted as previously described.
24
HEK293T cells
transfected were plated in a six-well plate at 80% confluency. After 24
hours, cells were rinsed once in the dish with ice-cold PBS. After
aspirating PBS, 300 μl ice-cold digitonin solution (40
μg/ml digitonin, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 2
mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl2) was added and incubated on a shaker at 4°C
for ten minutes. After incubation, the digitonin-derived cytosolic
extract was pipetted from the plate and spun at 20,000 × g for
one minute to pellet any floating cells. 200 μl of cytosolic
extract was added to 1 ml Trizol solution for RNA extraction.
RNA-seq library preparation
RiboGreen RNA Reagent (ThermoFisher) was used for RNA
quantification and quality control was performed by Agilent BioAnalyzer.
50–500 ng of total RNA underwent polyA selection and TruSeq
library preparation according to instructions provided by Illumina
(TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT Kit, catalog # RS-122–2102), with eight
cycles of PCR. Samples were barcoded and run on a HiSeq 4000 in a PE50
run, using the HiSeq 3000/4000 SBS Kit (Illumina). An average of 27
million paired reads was generated per sample.
Western Blotting
For whole cell lysate preparation, cells were trypsinized and washed
twice with PBS and lysed in 2x Laemmli Sample buffer (Alfa Aesar, J61337).
For cytosolic lysate, cytosol was extracted with digitonin as described
above and one volume of 2x Laemmli Sample buffer was added. Laemmli lysates
were boiled for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE on
NuPAGE 4%–12% Bis-Tris gradient protein gel (Invitrogen). Imaging was
captured on the Odyssey DLx imaging system (Li-Cor). Quantification was
performed using ImageJ. The antibodies used are listed in the
key resources table
.
TIS11B iCLIP
Transfection
HEK293T cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes at 80% confluency in
antibiotic free media. After 24 hours, cells were transfected by calcium
phosphate with either 3 μg GFP-TIS11B or 1.5 μg GFP-only
per dish.
Sample preparation
20 hours after transfection, cells were rinsed once with
ice-cold PBS and 6 ml of fresh PBS was added to each plate before
cross-linking. Cells were irradiated once with 150 mJ/cm
2
in
a Spectroline UV Crosslinker at 254 nm. Irradiated cells were scraped
into Eppendorf tubes, spun at 500 × g for one minute, and
snap-frozen. Crosslinked cell pellets were lysed in iCLIP lysis buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma I8896),
0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate), sonicated with the Bioruptor Pico
for 10 cycles 30 seconds ON/30 seconds OFF, and supplemented with 0.5 U
of RNase I per 1 mg/ml lysate for RNA fragmentation. Lysates were
pre-cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 × g at 4°C. A mix
of Protein A/G Dynabeads (50 μl of each per sample, Life
Technologies) were coupled to 10 μg of rabbit anti-GFP antibody
(Abcam ab290). TIS11B protein-RNA complexes were immunoprecipitated from
1 ml of crosslinked lysate and washed with high salt and PNK buffer
(NEB). RNA was repaired by 3′ dephosphorylation and ligated to
L3-IR adaptor on beads.
56
Excess adaptor was removed by incubation with
5′ deadenylase and the exonuclease RecJf (NEB). TIS11B
protein-RNA complexes were eluted from the beads by heating at
70°C for one minute. The complexes were then visualized via the
infrared-labeled adaptor, purified with SDS-PAGE, and transferred to
nitrocellulose membrane. cDNA was synthesized with Superscript IV
Reverse Transcriptase (Life Technologies) and circularized by CircLigase
II. Circularized cDNA was purified with AMPure bead-based purification
(A63880, Beckman Coulter), amplified by PCR and sequenced by
Novaseq.
RNA-FISH
Single molecule RNA-FISH for endogenous mRNAs
Probe design.
Primary probes were designed using the ProbeDealer package
in MATLAB.
57
Each
primary probe contains 30 transcript-targeting nucleotides preceded
by 20 common nucleotides that are complementary to the secondary
probe. At least 30 probes were designed for each transcript,
purchased in a pool from IDT. The secondary probes are 5′
conjugated to AlexaFluor 633 and were purchased from IDT.
Transfection
Prior to cell seeding, 35 mm glass cover slips were sterilized
with ethanol then incubated in 1 μg/ml fibronectin in PBS at room
temperature for one hour. Cover slips were rinsed in PBS and HeLa cells
were seeded at 100,000 per coverslip. 24 hours after seeding, cells were
co-transfected with 250 ng BFP-TIS11B and 100ng of GFP-SEC61B using
Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen).
Sample preparation
20 hours after transfection, cells were rinsed once with PBS
then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature.
All steps were performed at room temperature if not otherwise noted.
Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton-X
solution for 10 minutes. Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and incubated
for five minutes in pre-hybridization buffer (2xSSC, 50% formamide).
Cells were incubated in primary probe hybridization solution (40
μM primary probe, 2xSSC, 50% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate
(Sigma), 200 μg/ml yeast tRNA (Sigma), 1:100 Murine RNase
Inhibitor (NEB)), for at least 15 hours at 37°C. To remove excess
or unbound primary probes, cells were then rinsed twice in 2xSSC + 0.1%
Tween for 15 minutes at 60°C then once more for 15 minutes at
room temperature. Cells were incubated in secondary probe solution (4 nM
secondary probe, 2xSSC, 50% ethylene carbonate, 1:100 Murine RNase
Inhibitor) for 30 minutes in the dark. Secondary probes were rinsed
twice in 50% ethylene carbonate, 2xSSC solution for five minutes then
mounted with Prolong Diamond mounting solution (Invitrogen).
Cytosol extraction
To visualize and validate CY+ versus TG+ or ER+ endogenous
mRNAs, HeLa cells were seeded as described above, then incubated in 2 ml
digitonin solution described above (40 μg/ml digitonin, 150 mM
NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl2) for 10 min
at 4°C. Digitonin solution was removed, coverslips were rinsed
with 2 ml PBS, and RNA-FISH was performed as described above. Mounting
media with DAPI was used to visualize nuclei (Invitrogen
P36931
).
Validation of TG+ and ER+ mRNAs using smRNA-FISH
We performed smRNA-FISH on endogenous mRNAs (
Table S2
) while
simultaneously visualizing TGs and the ER. We considered an mRNA to have
an unbiased localization pattern if its transcript distribution
correlated with the cytoplasmic compartment sizes. As a proxy for the
relative compartment sizes, we used the area occupied by TGs or the ER
compared to the whole cell area, obtained from the maximum projection of
the fluorescent signals in 186 cells. We used FIJI to delineate the
whole cell border with the fluorescent signal from RNA-FISH. For TGs,
the fluorescent signal from BFP-TIS11B and for the ER the fluorescent
signal from GFP-SEC61B both obtained from the maximum intensity
Z-projections was used to delineate each compartment. Where there was
overlap between the TG mask and the ER mask, the ER was subtracted, and
the region was defined as TG. In this way the compartments are mutually
exclusive. The mask area of each compartment was quantified and read out
as a proportion of the total cell area. Across all cells, the median
size of TGs was estimated to be 11% of the cell size, whereas the median
ER size was estimated to be 29% of the cell size (
Figures 1I
and
1J
). Therefore, for mRNAs with an unbiased transcript
distribution, we expect that typically 11% of transcripts colocalize
with TGs and 29% colocalize with the ER.
To determine mRNA transcripts enriched in TG or ER, smRNA-FISH
foci were counted using the maxima function and the total number of foci
per cell are quantified. Next, all foci are overlaid with the TG mask
and the ER mask to identify mRNAs that colocalize with each compartment.
To determine if an mRNA is compartment enriched, we tested if its
observed compartment distribution differs from the expected distribution
based on compartment size using a Mann Whitney test. The code for the
image analysis is available (see below).
Of note, this analysis does not distinguish between nuclear and
cytoplasmic mRNA localization. For 7/8 mRNAs this does not influence the
outcome because the mRNA signal in the nucleus is negligible or
non-existent. However, smRNA-FISH probes for endogenous
TES
produce high nuclear background signal. In this
case, the prominence value, used to define local maxima to call foci, is
increased such that nuclear noise does not substantially influence foci
quantification (
Figure
S2G
).
Validation of CY+ mRNAs by smRNA-FISH after digitonin
extraction
To distinguish CY+ mRNAs from TG+ or ER+ mRNAs, we performed
smRNA-FISH on endogenous mRNAs in untreated and digitonin treated cells,
as previously reported.
58
The total number of mRNA foci per cell is
calculated using the maxima function in FIJI. Next, thresholding is
applied to DAPI fluorescence to generate a nuclear mask. Total mRNA foci
are overlaid with the DAPI mask and nuclear foci are subtracted from the
total, yielding cytoplasmic foci. Cytoplasmic foci are quantified for at
least 10 cells per condition per experiment. For each experiment, the
mean fraction of transcripts retained is calculated as the average
cytoplasmic foci per digitonin-treated cell divided by the average
cytoplasmic foci per untreated cell. At least three separate experiments
per mRNA were performed.
RNA-FISH after transfection of constructs
RNA-FISH experiments probing for GFP-fusion constructs were
performed as described previously.
16
Stellaris FISH probes for eGFP with Quasar 670
Dye were used.
Line profile analysis
To quantify colocalization of ER (GFP-SEC61B) and mRNA (AF633)
fluorescence signals, line profiles were generated with FIJI (ImageJ).
For each cell, 2–4 straight lines were drawn to cross the ER in
different directions, indicated by the white arrows shown in the
figures. Fluorescence signal along the straight line of the ER and the
mRNA reporter was calculated for each channel using the plot profile
tool in FIJI. The values of the Pearson’s correlation coefficient
r were calculated using Excel. Perfect correlation of protein-mRNA is
indicated by r = 1, perfect exclusion is indicated by r = −1, and
random distribution is indicated by r = 0.
Confocal microscopy
Confocal imaging was performed using ZEISS LSM 880 with Airyscan
super-resolution mode or Nikon CSU-W1 with SoRa super-resolution mode. A
Plan-Apochromat 63x/1.4 (Zeiss) or 60x/1.49 (Nikon) Oil objective was used.
For live cell imaging, cells were incubated with a LiveCell imaging chamber
(Zeiss, Nikon) at 37°C and 5% CO2 and imaged in cell culture media.
Excitations were performed sequentially using 405, 488, 594 or 633 nm laser
wavelength and imaging conditions were experimentally optimized to minimize
bleed-through. Z-stack images were captured with the interval size of 0.2
μm. Images were prepared with FIJI (ImageJ) software.
TMT mass spectrometry
To obtain protein expression levels, TMT mass spectrometry analysis
was performed on HEK293T cells cultivated in steady-state conditions. Cells
were trypsinized and washed three times with ice-cold PBS. Pelleted cells
were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed with 200
μl buffer containing 8 M urea and 200 mM EPPS (pH at 8.5) with
protease inhibitor (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3
(Sigma). Benzonase (Millipore) was added to a concentration of 50
μg/ml and incubated at room temperature for 15 min followed by water
bath sonication. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4°C for 10
min, and supernatant extracted. The Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein
concentration assay was used to determine protein concentration. Protein
disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at
room temperature for 15 min, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room
temperature for 30 min in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 10 mM
dithiothreitol at room temperature for 15 min. Aliquots of 100 μg
were taken for each sample and diluted to 100 μl with lysis buffer.
Samples were subject to chloroform/methanol precipitation as previously
described.
59
Pellets were reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS buffer and digested with Lys-C
(1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) and trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio),
and digested at 37°C overnight.
Peptides were TMT-labeled as described.
59
Briefly, peptides were TMT-tagged by
the addition of anhydrous ACN and TMTPro reagents (16plex) for each
respective sample and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. A ratio
check was performed by taking a 1 μl aliquot from each sample and
desalted by StageTip method.
60
TMT tags were then quenched with hydroxylamine to a
final concentration of 0.3% for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were
pooled 1:1 based on the ratio check and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Dried
peptides were reconstituted in 1 ml of 3% ACN/1% TFA, desalted using a 100
mg tC18 SepPak (Waters), and vacuum-centrifuged overnight.
Peptides were centrifuged to dryness and reconstituted in 1 ml of 1%
ACN/25mM ABC. Peptides were fractionated into 48 fractions. Briefly, an
Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Fraction Collector
using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 um 4.6 × 250 mm) was
operated at 1 ml/min. Buffer A, B, and C consisted of 100% water, 100% ACN,
and 25mM ABC, respectively. The fractionation gradient operated as follows:
1% B to 5% B in 1 min, 5% B to 35% B in 61 min, 35% B to 60% B in 5 min, 60%
B to 70% B in 3 min, 70% B to 1% B in 10 min, with 10% C the entire gradient
to maintain pH. The 48 fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions,
(i.e. fractions 1, 13, 25, 37 were pooled, followed by fractions 2, 14, 26,
38, etc.) so that every 12
th
fraction was used to pool. Pooled
fractions were vacuum-centrifuged and then reconstituted in 1% ACN/0.1% FA
for LC-MS/MS.
Fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a NanoAcquity (Waters)
with a 50 cm (inner diameter 75 μm) EASY-Spray Column (PepMap RSLC,
C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) heated to 60°C coupled to an Orbitrap
Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were
separated by direct injection at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient
of 5 to 30% acetonitrile (0.1% FA) in water (0.1% FA) over 3 hours and then
to 50% ACN in 30 min and analyzed by SPS-MS3. MS1 scans were acquired over a
range of m/z 375–1500, 120K resolution, AGC target (standard), and
maximum IT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on MS1 scans of charge
2–7 using isolation of 0.5 m/z, collision-induced dissociation with
activation of 32%, turbo scan, and max IT of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired
using specific precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches, m/z range
110–1000, 50K resolution, AGC target (custom, 200%), HCD activation
of 65%, max IT of 150 ms, and dynamic exclusion of 60 s.
Visualization of translation in TGs
The SunTag system was used to visualize mRNA translation in the
cytosol and the TGER domain. Stable expression of td-PP7–3xmCherry
(Addgene 74926) and scFv-GCN4-sfGFP (Addgene 60907) was achieved by
generating virus in HEK293T cells and transducing HeLa cells. Cells were
seeded on 3.5 cm glass bottom dishes (Cellvis, D35–20-1-N). 20 hours
later, cells were transfected with either the SunTag vector expressing
KIF18B (Addgene 74928) or SunTag-FOS-UTR. At 15 hours post transfection,
cells were treated with 100 ng/ml doxycycline for one hour to induce SunTag
expression. Confocal imaging was performed as described above.
Co-localization of foci was quantified using FIJI.
mRNA localization-dependent GFP protein expression
Transfection
HeLa cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 80% confluency and
transfected with 250 ng GFP-THAP1-MS2 and 250 ng of the MCP-mCherry
fusion constructs indicated in the figure (Lipofectamine 3000,
Invitrogen). When indicated, GFP-THAP1 or GFP-BIRC3-MS2-SU was used
instead of GFP-THAP1-MS2. At 13–15 hours post transfection, cells
were analyzed by FACS. For RNA-FISH experiments, cells were seeded at
80% confluency in 4-well slide chambers (Millipore Sigma) and
cotransfected with 75 ng GFP-THAP1-MS2, 100 ng BFP-SEC61B, and 75 ng of
the indicated MCP-mCherry fusion constructs.
FACS analysis to measure GFP protein expression
Cells were trypsinized, washed once in complete media, then
resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS plus 1% FCS). At least 5,000 cells were
measured on a BD LSR-Fortessa Cell Analyzer and FACS data were analyzed
using FlowJo software. GFP protein expression corresponds to GFP mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI). To determine the effect of MCP-tethered
RBPs on protein output of the GFP reporter mRNA, only cells that were
successfully cotransfected with both the MCP-mCherry fusion and the GFP
reporter constructs were analyzed. To do so, the double-positive cells
(mCherry+/GFP+) were gated, and all single positive and unstained cells
were excluded from the analysis. The reported GFP MFI was calculated
from the double-positive cells. Untransfected cells were used to draw
the gates for mCherry+ or GFP+ cells.
qPCR analysis to measure
GFP
mRNA
abundance
Cells were trypsinized, washed once in complete media, then
resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS plus 1% FCS). To determine the effect of
MCP-tethered RBPs on GFP reporter mRNA stability, cells were sorted
based on expression of both the MCP-mCherry fusion and the GFP reporter
constructs. The BD FACSAria III cell sorter was used to collect 50,000
cells from each co-transfected population. Cells were sorted directly
into 1 ml of TRIzol solution in Eppendorf tubes for total RNA was
extraction. cDNA synthesis was performed on 200 ng of RNA per sample
using the SuperScript IV VILO ezDNase Master Mix (Invitrogen). ezDNase
enzyme was included to eliminate plasmid DNA contamination. To measure
the relative expression levels of reporter mRNA by qRT-PCR, FastStart
Universal SYBR Green Master Mix (ROX) from Roche was used together with
GFP-qPCR F/R primers. GAPDH was used as a housekeeping gene.
Data analysis
RNA-seq of subcytoplasmic fractions from HEK293T cells
RNA-seq.
Alignment was generated in Dragen v3.10 (Illumina) against
the hg38-alt-masked-v2 reference acquired from GENCODE v43 with
default parameters. Gene expression analysis was performed using
HOMER v4.11 software.
61
The mean RPKM values of all biological
replicates were calculated and used for downstream analyses. Only
protein-coding genes were analyzed. A gene was considered expressed
if the RPKM value is 3 or greater.
Classification of membrane/secretory proteins versus non-membrane
proteins.
Information on the presence of transmembrane domains or a
signal sequence was obtained from UniProt. All expressed genes were
separated into mRNAs that encode membrane/secretory proteins or
non-membrane proteins. If a protein contains a signal sequence but
not a transmembrane domain, it is considered as secretory protein.
All proteins with transmembrane domains are considered membrane
proteins and all remaining proteins are classified as non-membrane
proteins. Among the 9155 mRNAs expressed in HEK293T cells, 2140 were
classified as membrane/secretory proteins, whereas 7015 were
classified as non-membrane proteins (
Table S1
).
Compartment-specific localization scores.
The sum of RPKM values obtained from TG particles, ER
particles, and the cytosol was considered as total cytoplasmic mRNA
expression. For each gene, the mean compartment-specific RPKM value
was divided by the total cytoplasmic mRNA expression. As a result,
each gene is assigned three localization scores that correspond to
the fraction of its transcripts that localize to each of the three
compartments: TGs, the ER, and the cytosol.
Compartment-specific enrichment of mRNAs that encode
membrane/secretory proteins.
We considered an mRNA to be ER-enriched if the ratio of
localization scores (ER/TG) was greater than 1.25 and classified it
as TG-enriched if it was smaller than 0.8. The median localization
score of membrane/secretory mRNAs in the cytosol was 0.09. If the
cytosolic localization score of an mRNA was greater than 0.36, it
was considered enriched in the cytosol. If the ER and TG-specific
localization scores were similar and the cytosolic partition
coefficient was smaller than 0.18, the mRNA was assigned to the ER,
whereas it was considered not localized if the cytosolic
localization score was smaller than 0.18 (
Figure S1H
).
Compartment-specific enrichment of mRNAs that encode non-membrane
proteins.
To faithfully compare differences in mRNA distribution
across the three compartments, it is necessary to know the relative
size distribution of the three compartments. However, this parameter
is currently unknown. Therefore, instead of comparing the
localization scores across samples, we determined the most enriched
mRNAs within each compartment. We considered an mRNA
compartment-enriched, if its average localization score (from
biological replicates) was at least 1.25-fold higher than the median
localization score of its corresponding compartment samples. For TG
particles, the median localization score was 0.32, for ER particles,
it was 0.30, and for the cytosol, the median localization score was
0.34. If the enrichment was observed in two compartments, the mRNA
was assigned to the compartment with the higher value. With this
strategy, we identified 1246 TG+ mRNAs, 919 non-overlapping ER+
mRNAs, and 1481 CY+ mRNAs. The remaining 3369 mRNAs (48%) do not
have a compartment-biased mRNA localization pattern and were called
(unbiased).
Justification of the cut-off used to determine
compartment-enriched mRNAs. A minimum cut-off of 1.25-fold higher
than the median localization score corresponds to approximately one
standard deviation. The compartment-enriched mRNAs differed
substantially in their functional and architectural features (
Figure 2
). We generated subgroups
among the compartment-enriched mRNAs that represent the top, middle,
and bottom-enriched subgroups (
Figure S4
). Even when
focusing on the bottom-enriched groups (which are close to the
cut-off used), the differences in functional and architectural
features across the compartment-enriched groups were still highly
significant (
Figure S4
). The cut-off is further justified as we were
able to validate 10/11 mRNAs considered to be compartment enriched
with an independent method. Moreover, we demonstrate that
TG-translated MYC has biological effects, despite
MYC
mRNA being found in the bottom enriched TG+
group.
19
mRNA transcript distribution in HEK293T TIS11B KO cells
We focused on the analysis of mRNAs that encode non-membrane
proteins (
Table
S5
). The mean RPKM values of the biological replicates of
digitonin-extracted samples and the ER particles were calculated for
TIS11B KO cells and their corresponding control HEK293T cells. A gene
was considered expressed if the average RPKM value in the ER and in the
cytosol samples was greater than 3 RPKM (
N
= 6229). The
compartment-specific localization scores were calculated and the
difference in localization scores between TIS11B KO and control samples
were calculated for ER and cytosol. The top 20% of genes with a
localization change towards ER or the cytosol were intersected with
genes considered as TG+ (
N
= 1246) and further analyzed
with respect to their bound RBPs and architectural features.
mRNA and protein features of the localized mRNAs
RPKM values of mRNAs were obtained from RNA-seq data of
unfractionated HEK293T cells and were determined for the
compartment-biased mRNAs. Pro-seq and RNA-seq from HEK293 cells were
obtained from GEO (
GSE140365
: PRO-seq;
GSE142895
: RNA-seq).
27
Raw reads were
processed by trimmomatic (version: 0.39) to trim low-quality ends
(average quality per base < 15, 4 bp window) and
adapters.
62
Trimmed reads were mapped to the human genome (hg19) using hisat2
(version: 2.1.0).
63
Reads mapped to each gene were counted by featureCounts (version:
1.6.4).
64
To
estimate mRNA stability rates, log
2
-normalized counts of
Pro-seq data were divided by the log
2
-normalized RNA-seq
data, as described previously.
28
3′UTR length of each mRNA was obtained
from Ref-seq. The longest 3′UTR isoform of each gene is reported.
mRNA length, CDS length, average CDS exon length, and total exon number
of genes were determined using transcripts from the Matched Annotation
from the NCBI and EMBL-EBI (MANE)
65
human version 1.2. For each gene, the
transcript with longest mRNA length was selected. Protein length was
calculated by dividing CDS length by three.
Proteomics protein expression analysis
Protein expression was obtained from TMT-based quantitative
mass spectrometry analysis of HEK293T cells. Precursor protein abundance
was calculated for each protein and scaled to the TMT abundance for each
channel. Relative abundance was then calculated by averaging the
condition-specific biological replicates. In brief, mass spectra were
processed using Protein Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher) using the Minora
algorithm (set to default parameters) for precursor quantification and
using a TMTpro workflow for TMT-based quantification. Database searching
included all canonical entries from the human Reference Proteome UniProt
database (SwissProt – 2022–03), as well as an in-house
curated list of contaminants. The identification of proteins was
performed using the SEQUEST-HT engine against the database using the
following parameters: a tolerance level of 10 ppm for MS
1
and
0.6 Da for MS
2
post-recalibration and the false discovery
rate of the Percolator decoy database search was set to 1%. Trypsin was
used as the digestion enzyme, two missed cleavages were allowed, and the
minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamido-methylation
of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as static modifications, while
oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable
modification. The final protein-level FDR was set to 1%. Precursor
abundance quantification was determined based on intensity, and the
minimum replicate feature parameter was set at 50%. Proteins were
quantified based on unique and razor peptides and proteins with less
than two different peptides were excluded. For TMT-based quantification,
similar search parameters were used, with the addition of TMTpro tags on
lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) set as static
modifications. For TMTpro-based reporter ion quantitation, the summed
signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel was extracted, and the
closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion
was found (integration tolerance of 0.003 Da). PSMs with poor quality,
MS
3
spectra with TMT reporter ion channels missing, or
isolation specificity less than 0.7, or with less than 70% of SPS masses
matching to the identified peptides, or with an average TMT reporter
summed signal-to-noise ratio that was less than 10 or had no
MS
3
spectra were excluded from quantification. We
exported the results of protein identification and quantification to
Excel, including the TMT-based reporter ion quantitation. Additionally,
we extracted the MS
1
precursor abundance for each protein
(Minora algorithm), which indicates its relative abundance in the
tryptic sample. Each MS
1
-based abundance measured should be a
representation of the sum of all the respective TMT-labeled peptides
combined. Therefore, for a rudimentary metric of protein abundance
across samples, we divided the total MS
1
-abundance for
individual proteins by their respective TMT summed signal-to-noise ratio
to each TMT channel.
CLIP data analysis
iCLIP analysis of TIS11B in HEK293T cells.
Raw fastq files were demultiplexed using the iCount python
package (
https://icount.readthedocs.io
). 5′ and
3′ adapters were trimmed by Cutadapt.
66
Trimmed reads were mapped to
human genome using STAR and reads mapping to tRNA/rRNA were
discarded.
67
Crosslink sites were called from bam files
using the ‘‘xlsites’’ function of
iCount. CLIP-seq analysis was carried out on the iMaps platform
(
https://imaps.genialis.com/iclip
), where peak calling
was performed by analysing cDNA counts at crosslink sites using
Paraclu.
68
Motif analysis was carried out using HOMER software. Enrichment was
calculated within the genomic coordinates of a total of 57,714
TIS11B CLIP peaks found in 3′UTRs. Total peaks: 190,920;
peaks in 3′UTRs: 57,714.
POSTAR3 CLIP data.
CLIP data on 168 RBPs were downloaded from
Postar3
34
and peak counts that overlapped with annotated 3′UTRs from
Ref-seq in all mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins were
recorded. For each RBP, the median number of 3′UTRs CLIP
peaks was calculated and all 3′UTRs with peaks counts greater
than the median were considered as targets. Based on the fraction of
mRNAs that are considered compartment-specific (TG: 17.8%; ER 13.1%;
CY: 21.1%; unbiased: 48.0%), we determined the expected number of
target genes for each compartment. If the observed number of targets
divided by the expected number of targets in a compartment was
greater than 1.5, the RBP was added to our short-list (
Table S4
). As
TIS11B and TIA1/L1 are known to bind to AU-rich sequences, we added
the processed PAR-CLIP data of the LARP4B RBP as it was reported to
bind to AU-rich elements.
33
Logistic regression.
The R package ‘nnet’ (v7.3–17) was
used to fit logistic regression models to predict the subcytoplasmic
mRNA localization of non-membrane proteins. An initial model used
CLIP peak counts from the RBPs on the short list (
N
= 24). A second model used the top seven RBPs from the first model
fit and added mRNA length and average CDS exon length. Covariates
with missing values were imputed as zeros. All covariates were first
‘sqrt’ transformed and then standardized. The
‘unbiased’ category was used as the base level. The R
package ‘broom’ (v0.8.0) was used to compute t-test
statistics for the model coefficients. The code is available on
github (
github.com/Mayrlab/tiger-seq
).
Confirmation of the logistic regression.
To validate the contribution of each individual RBP, we
used more stringent criteria to determine their targets. Among all
mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins with at least one CLIP peak
in the 3′UTR, we considered the top third of mRNAs as targets
of each RBP (TIS11B: 1781 targets; TIA1/L1: 1313 targets; LARP4B:
1621 targets; METAP2: 256 targets; HuR: 1124 targets; PUM2: 427
targets; HNRNPC: 232 targets). mRNAs only bound by LARP4B or METAP2
are LARP4B/ METAP2 targets and not bound by another RBP (from the
seven RBPs investigated),
N
= 717. mRNAs
predominantly bound by TIS11B are TIS11B targets exclusively bound
by TIS11B or co-bound by TIA1/L1, with TIS11B/TIA1/L1 ≥ 2
(
N
= 834). mRNAs pre-dominantly bound by
TIA1/L1 are TIA1/L1 targets exclusively bound by TIA1/L1 or co-bound
by TIS11B but TIS11B/TIA1/L1 < 2 (
N
=
634).
Intersection of membrane/secretory mRNAs with previous
datasets
APEX-seq.
The mRNAs that are coexpressed in our RNA-seq dataset
(
N
= 9155 mRNAs) and the ER membrane-localized
mRNAs from the APEX-seq dataset (
N
= 1045) were
determined.
11
The overlapping 845 mRNAs were intersected with
the mRNAs that encode membrane/secretory proteins found to be ER+ in
our analysis (
N
= 1476). We detected 673 mRNAs
which correspond to 80% of all APEX-seq mRNAs that are considered to
be ER membrane (ERM)-enriched. The universe used to test for
enrichment were all mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins
(
N
= 2140).
Biochemical fractionation.
A similar analysis was performed for the fractionation
dataset from Reid and Nicchitta.
9
Among the 385 coexpressed mRNAs that are
enriched on the ER according to Reid, we detected 308 in our ER+
fraction when focusing on membrane/secretory protein encoding mRNAs.
This group represents 80% of all ER-enriched mRNAs detected by
Reid.
MERFISH.
In the MERFISH dataset, which was generated in U2OS cells,
1037 mRNAs are considered ER-enriched. Among them,
N
= 571 are co-expressed in our dataset and
considered mRNAs encoding membrane/secretory proteins. Among the 571
co-expressed mRNAs we consider 511 as ER+, which corresponds to 89%.
Among the ER-de-enriched mRNAs (Log2FC nonER vs ER = −0.34),
only 69 mRNAs encode membrane/secretory proteins. Among the 69
mRNAs, we consider 8 as ER+, which corresponds to 11.6%.
13
Intersection of mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins with a
previous dataset
The relative distribution of mRNA transcripts across
subcellular compartments, including the membrane fraction,
phase-separated granules, and the cytosol was determined using
density gradient centrifugation in U2OS cells.
25
The number of co-expressed
mRNAs that encode non-membrane proteins was
N
=
6557, which corresponds to 93% of our dataset. This dataset
determines the proportion of transcripts that localize to the
different fractions. For co-expressed TG+ mRNAs (
N
= 1153), ER+ mRNAs (
N
= 839) and CY+ mRNAs
(
N
= 1400), we plotted the proportion of mRNAs
that localize to phase-separated granules, to the membrane fraction,
and to the cytosol in the LoRNA dataset in U2OS cells.
Gene ontology analysis
Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using
DAVID.
30
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical parameters are reported in the figures and figure legends,
including the definitions and exact values of
N
and
experimental measures (mean ± SD or boxplots depicting median,
25
th
and 75
th
percentile (boxes) and 5% and 95%
confidence intervals (error bars). Pair-wise transcriptomic feature comparisons
were performed using a two-sided Mann-Whitney test. For more than two samples, a
Kruskal-Wallis test was performed. For transcriptomic analyses, statistical
significance is indicated by asterisks *, 0.05 > P > 1 ×
10–9; **, 1 × 10–10 > P > 1 ×
10–20; ***, 1 × 10–21 > P > 1 ×
10–80; ****, 1 × 10–81 > P > 0. Exact P
values are listed in
Table
S3
. Enrichment was determined using a X
2
test. The
P
value was calculated using a two-sided Fisher’s
exact test. When indicated, a two-sided t-test with assumption of equal variance
was applied. Statistical significance for experimental data is indicated by
asterisks *,
P
< 0.05, **,
P
<
0.01, ***,
P
< 0.001, ****,
P
<
0.0001.
Supplementary Material
MMC6
MMC4
MMC3
MMC5
MMC2
MMC1