Introduction
During the last few decades of neurological
diseases research,
proteomic studies using brain tissue samples have provided unparalleled
opportunities to identify a large number of proteins, protein expression
changes, associated biological systems, and pathological processes
across diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s
disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), mild traumatic
brain injury (mTBI), and other either neurological or psychiatric
disorders.
1
−
4
One of the main advantages of mass spectrometry (MS)-based
proteomics,
especially when studying sporadic non-monogenic brain disorders, resides
in the elimination of pre-established assumptions concerning a specific
type of protein or expression level change, occurring during physiological
or pathological conditions.
5
While the
MS-proteomics approach can certainly be a useful means to confirm
previously hypothesis-driven generated results,
6
,
7
its
major strength consists in the fundamental capacity to deliver hypothesis-free
qualitative and quantitative findings when comparing normal vs pathological
conditions. Then, as such, MS-proteomics may provide unexpected outcomes
and significantly contribute to the identification of specific proteins
and related biological processes underlying a pathological condition
in a specific organ (i.e., brain) or region of it (i.e., hippocampus),
even at cellular and subcellular level (i.e., hippocampal pyramidal
neurons vs astroglial cells’ nuclei).
Based on the above-described
MS-proteomics properties, we assessed
MS-based proteomic differences occurring in the hippocampus (Hippo)
of double explosive-driven blasts vs no blast (sham/control) exposed
rats. The rationale to focus first on the Hippo has been based on
the importance of this neuroanatomical region as the main cerebral
substrate for cognitive functions such as memory, which are frequently
impaired following blast exposure after a single or repeated blast-TBI
exposure.
8
,
9
Indeed, the Hippo, its subregions, and its
connected neural pathways can be selectively affected in a specific
sensory-modality and consequently affect specific memory-related behaviors.
These altered memory-specific behaviors are actually commonly reported
as part of the clinical manifestations following blast-TBI exposure,
especially in the context of complex neurological and psychiatric
disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), episodic-memory
deficits, acoustic or visual emotional hyperreactivity, chronic depression
and anxiety disorders, and others.
10
−
13
Notably, while the multifactorial
nature of combat-related neurological
and psychiatric disorders is quite complex and likely explained by
the combination of several biological and nonbiological factors, it
still remains incompletely known if there are direct and specific
molecular changes produced by the effects of explosive-driven primary
blast on the brain, or more blast-sensitive regions of it, and if
so, what are the possible associated short- and long-term molecular
and clinical consequences.
14
,
15
Previous blast-TBI
proteomic investigations analyzed tissues obtained
from blast-TBI experiments performed, almost exclusively, using pressure-wave
generator systems. These pressure-wave generator systems, although
experimentally valuable, do not entirely reflect the peculiarities
of specific fluid-dynamic aspects generated by explosive-driven blast
events.
16
Remarkably, proteomic analyses
using tissue samples from a specific region of the brain, such as
the Hippo, from animals exposed to an explosive-driven double blast
have never been described.
Operating an explosive-driven blast
wave generator and following
rigorous experimental procedures, changes in the abundance of proteins
classically associated with neurodegenerative disorders [e.g., Tau,
amyloid precursor protein (APP), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP),
etc.] across different brain regions, including the Hippo, were detected.
17
,
18
However, the possibility that a much larger array of proteins normally
expressed in the Hippo could be altered as an effect of repeated explosive-driven
blast-primary waves remained open.
The main goal of this investigation
was to use MS-based proteomic
analyses to identify a wider range of proteins and related expression
level changes in the Hippo as a direct consequence of two consecutive
explosive-driven blast exposures. We have previously hypothesized
that even in the absence of overt behavioral or neuropathological
consequences of double explosive-driven blast exposure, the brain
or specific regions of it, undergo significant proteomic changes as
a direct result of repetitive primary blast waves without the influence
of concussive injury, which may play a role in further molecular mechanisms
of neural disruption or degeneration. We have defined this condition
as ABIMAS (asymptomatic blast-induced molecular altered status).
18
Materials and Methods
These MS-based procedures aimed
to detect differences in the proteomic
profiling of molecules expressed in the Hippo of rats exposed to two
consecutive (24 h apart) explosive-driven blasts (2xBl) in comparison
to non-blasted sham/control (SH) animals after a period of 15 days
following the second blast exposure. A detailed description of the
explosive-driven generator system, experimental parameters, and procedures
performed, including behavioral analyses have been described before.
17
,
18
Here, we briefly explain the general experimental scheme and methods
used, with more detail devoted to the molecular and proteomic procedures.
The hippocampal samples used in this proteomic analysis were from
the same animals described in our previous publications.
17
,
18
Animals
Male Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River Laboratories,
Wilmington, MA, USA), ∼3 months of age at arrival, were used.
All rats were housed in a pair in the animal vivarium in standard
rat cages in a 12 h light/dark reverse light cycle room with food
and water provided ad libitum. Rats were acclimatized to the vivarium
for 3 days prior to any handling. Rats were handled according to a
protocol approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) at the Uniformed Services University (USU, Bethesda, MD) in
compliance with the PHS Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals,
ARRIVE guidelines, and all applicable Federal regulations governing
the protection of animals in research.
Study Time Course
Rats arrived approximately 21 days
prior to the first blast day. Following acclimation to the vivarium
for 3 days, rats were handled for 4 days, and baseline evaluations
were conducted on all rats from day −14 to day −1 prior
to the start of blast or control procedures. Rats were weighed and
divided into two groups: explosive-driven double blast-exposed (2xBl)
(rats exposed to two blast events, 24 h apart,
n
=
12) and sham (SH) (rats exposed to an equivalent amount/quality of
handling and anesthesia, but not to the actual blast,
n
= 12). On day −14, rats were subjected to baseline behavioral
tests for neurological functions, cognitive function/spatial learning,
locomotor activity, and gait analysis.
17
Baseline evaluations concluded on day −1. On day 0,
rats were transported to the blast site for the first of two blasts
or blast-control exposures. Twenty-four (24) h later, rats were again
transported to the blast site for the second exposure. From day 1
to day 14, rats were evaluated on the same behavioral tests used prior
to the blast. On day 15 all rats were euthanized.
Blast Exposure
Prior to blast exposure, rats were deeply
anesthetized by intraperitoneal (ip) administration of a mixture of
ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) and placed in a cylindrical
aluminum holder to minimize the blast impact on other organ systems.
Rats were exposed 2 at a time to a shock wave of about 30 psi (∼207
kPa) incident overpressure and 8–10 ms positive-phase duration,
as generated by the detonation of high explosive (sensitized liquid
nitromethane) within the blast wave generator. The explosive charge
was placed within the driver section of the tube at a 20′ distance
from the fixed rat holder. Preliminary blasts (calibration shots)
were carried out with pressure transducers, but without test rats,
to establish the charges needed to obtain the target peak pressure
of 30 psi (∼207 kPa).
Tissue Collection
On day 15, rats were deeply anesthetized
by ip administration of a mixture of ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine
(10 mg/kg). Upon absence of muscle reflex from a toe pinch, rats were
euthanized via thoracotomy (2xBl,
n
= 6 and SH,
n
= 6) and perfused transcardially with 0.9% saline for
5 min, and brains were removed, flash frozen in chilled isopentane
and stored at −80 °C for protein analysis [for the analyses
presented here, biological replicates were six rats (
n
= 6) per 2xBl and SH groups].
Tissue Sample Preparation for Proteomics and Western Blot Analysis
The Hippo was microdissected from 100 μm thick coronal sections
cut on a cryostat from fresh frozen brains.
19
Approximately 100 mg of hippocampal tissue per animal was collected
and homogenized for sample preparation as previously described.
17
Micro BCA assay (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, 23235,
Waltham, MA, USA) was used to determine the total protein content,
and samples were subsequently used for proteomic or WB analyses.
TMT Proteomics
Isobaric Mass Tag Labeling and Fractionation
Proteins
(50 μg) were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol in 10 mM triethylammonium
bicarbonate (TEAB) at 60 °C for 45 min followed by alkylating
with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 10 mM TEAB at room temperature in the
dark for 15 min. MS interfering reagents were removed by precipitating
proteins by adding 8 volumes of 10% trichloroacetic acid in cold acetone
at −20 °C for 2 h, then centrifuged at 16,000g for 10
min at 4 °C. The protein pellet was washed twice with an equivalent
8 volumes of cold acetone and centrifuged at 16,000
g
for 10 min at 4 °C. Each of the 12 protein pellets (50 μg)
was resuspended and digested overnight at 37 °C in 100 μL
of 100 mM TEAB with 5 μg of trypsin/Lys-C per sample and labeled
with a unique TMTpro 16-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher, LOT # VJ313476)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All 12 TMT labeled
peptide samples were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended
in 100 μL of 200 mM TEAB buffer, and filtered through Pierce
Detergent removal columns (Fisher Scientific PN 87777) to remove excess
TMT labels, small molecules, and lipids. Peptides in the flow through
were diluted to 2 mL in 10 mM TEAB and fractionation on a XBridge
C18 Column (5 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm column, Waters) using
a 0 to 90% acetonitrile in 10 mM TEAB gradient over 85 min at 250
μL/min on an Agilent 1200 series capillary HPLC with a microfraction
collector. Eighty-four 250 μL fractions were collected and concatenated
into 24 fractions according to Wang et al. (2011)
20
and dried by vacuum centrifugation.
Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Peptides in each of the
24 fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) interfaced with an Easy-nLC1100 UPLC by reverse-phase
chromatography on a 75 μm × 20 cm picofrit column (New
Objective Littleton, MA) in-house packed with ReproSIL-Pur-120-C18-AQ
3 μm, 120 Å (Dr. Albin Maisch, Germany), using a 2–90%
acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid gradient over 110 min at 300 nL/min.
Eluting peptides were sprayed into the mass spectrometer through a
1 μm emitter tip (New Objective) at 2.3 kV. Survey scans (MS)
of precursor ions were acquired from 375 to 1500
m
/
z
at 120,000 resolution at 200
m
/
z
with automatic gain control (AGC) at 4 ×
10
5
and a 50 ms maximum injection time (IT). Precursor
ions were individually isolated within 0.7
m
/
z
by data-dependent monitoring and 15s dynamic exclusion
and fragmented using an HCD activation collision energy 35. Fragmentation
spectra (MS/MS) were acquired using a 1.25 × 10
5
AGC
and 86 ms maximum IT at 50,000 resolution.
Data Analysis
Fragmentation spectra were processed
by Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (PD2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) and searched
with Mascot v.2.8.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against RefSeq2021_204
Rattus database. Search criteria included trypsin enzyme, one missed
cleavage, 3 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.01 Da fragment mass tolerance,
with TMTpro on N-terminus and carbamidomethylation on C as fixed and
TMTpro on K, oxidation on M, and deamidation on N or Q as variable
modifications. Peptide identifications from the Mascot searches were
processed within PD2.4 using Percolator at a 5% false discovery rate
(FDR) confidence threshold, based on an autoconcatenated decoy database
search. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered for isolation
interference <30%. Relative protein abundances of identified proteins
were determined in PD2.4 from the normalized median ratio of TMT reporter
ions, having signal-to-noise ratios >4, from all PSMs from the
same
protein. Technical variation in ratios from our mass spectrometry
analysis is less than 10%.
21
Western Blot
Protein-Target Selection Criteria and Primary Antibodies for
WB Analyses
To verify protein level changes among the top
5% up- and down-regulated proteins identified as differentially expressed
in the Hippo of 2xBl vs SH based on MS-proteomic procedures and stringent
criteria (>15% fold change [Log2(FC) = ± 0.20],
p
≤ 0.05, ≤5% FDR),
22
,
23
WB analyses
were performed for the following protein targets:
Kinesin family member C2 (KIFC2, 1:350, Invitrogen,
Thermo-Fisher Scientific, PA5-32165, Waltham, MA, USA); a microtubule-binding
protein predicted to function as a motor protein in vesicle transport
along axons and/or dendrites.
24
Membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted
3 (MAGI3,
1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., sc-136471, Dallas, TX, USA);
a scaffolding protein at cell–cell junctions, regulating various
cellular and signaling processes. MAGI3 together with PTEN modulates
the kinase activity of AKT1. Also, MAGI3 interactions with PTPRB and
phosphorylated tyrosine suggests that it may link receptor tyrosine
phosphatase with its substrates at the plasma membrane.
25
WB Procedures
Protein samples were mixed with dH2O,
10% by volume 10× NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent (Life Technologies,
2353153, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 25% by volume 4× Laemmli Sample
Buffer (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., 1610747, Hercules, CA, USA), and
a calculated volume of protein to achieve 2 μg/μL concentration,
and denatured for 10 min at 70 °C before electrophoresis. Novex
Nupage 4–12% Bis-Tris Gels (Life Technologies, NP0329, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) were loaded with 10 μg of protein sample per well and
electrophoresed for 30 min at constant 200 V (except for KIFC2 which
was run for 60 min to further separate protein bands), and one well
on each gel was loaded with 2.5 μL of Precision Plus Protein
Dual Color Standards (Bio-Rad Laboratories, 1610374, Hercules, CA,
USA). Gels were transferred using the iBlot2 dry transfer method (Life
Technologies, IB21001, Carlsbad, CA, USA) onto PVDF membranes, which
were then incubated at RT for 10 min with Ponceau S Staining Solution
(Boston BioProducts, ST-180, Ashland, MA, USA) and rinsed with dH2O
until protein bands in discrete lanes were visible for scanning of
whole protein on an Epson Perfection V39 (Epson America, Inc., Los
Alamitos, CA, USA) in 8 bit grayscale at 300 dpi. Following destaining
of the Ponceau S with 1× TBST rinse, membranes were blocked for
1 h at room temperature in 5% milk with 1× TBST.
Primary
antibodies were diluted to appropriate working concentrations in 5%
milk in 1× TBST (except for MAGI3 which was diluted in 1×TBST
only) and incubated on the membranes at 4 °C overnight. After
rinsing the membranes for 3 × 5 min in 1× TBST, they were
incubated for 2 h at RT in appropriate HRP-tagged secondary antibodies
(see below) diluted 1:2000 in the same kind of buffer used for primary
incubation. Membranes were rinsed in 1× TBST for 3 × 5 min
and in 1× TBS for 1 × 5 min and then incubated for 1 min
in a chemiluminescent substrate (SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, 34577, Waltham, MA, USA) and
imaged on a LiCor C-Digit Blot Scanner (LiCor Biosciences, Lincoln,
NE, USA). Densitometry was performed using ImageJ software v2.9.0
(NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA), with all protein intensities normalized
to total protein signal intensity.
Secondary Antibodies
HRP-tagged secondary antibodies
goat antimouse (1:2000, Abcam, ab97040, Cambridge, MA, USA) and goat
antirabbit (1:2000, Abcam, ab97080, Cambridge, MA, USA) were used
for chemiluminescent detection of the protein signal.
Secondary Analyses
Protein–Protein Interaction Analysis
As a secondary
aim for this investigation, we consulted a protein–protein
interaction database to examine if MAGI3, either singularly considered
or grouped with other proteins associated with neurodegeneration,
was possibly part of already known protein–protein interactions
and related biological pathways as currently identified in humans
and other mammals. We used a publicly available data source, STRING,
26
a database collecting all known and predicted
protein–protein interactions including direct (physical) and
indirect (functional) associations from computational prediction,
knowledge transfer between organisms, and interactions aggregated
from other primary databases. Presently, the STRING database covers
67,592,464 proteins from 14,094 organisms.
Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis
In addition, we consulted
the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID),
27
,
28
which provides a set of functional annotation
tools to better understand the biological meaning behind large lists
of genes. These tools are powered by the comprehensive DAVID Knowledgebase
built upon the DAVID Gene Concept which pulls together multiple sources
of functional annotations (
https://david.ncifcrf.gov
). Gene Ontology (GO) analyses were performed by using DAVID software.
A list of proteins of differential abundance (increased and decreased)
in the Hippo after double-blast exposure identified through our proteomic
analysis was reduced from 230 target proteins into a list of 154 target
proteins with available gene names from Proteome Discoverer. Of these
154 target proteins, 135 were identified in DAVID with official gene
symbols and analyzed against the background of
Homo
sapiens
. Within DAVID’s functional annotation
tool, we selected the GO analyses for molecular function (including
120 of the terms from our list, 88.9% coverage), cellular component
(including 131 terms from our list, 97.0% coverage), and biological
process (including 124 terms from our list, 91.9% coverage). Significance
was determined with the threshold
p
≤ 0.05.
Statistical Analysis
Proteomic Analyses
The ANOVA method was used to calculate
the
p
-values of mean protein ratios for the biological
replicates set up using a non-nested (or unpaired) design.
WB Analyses
Densitometry data from WB were analyzed
by one-tailed, unpaired
t
-tests using GraphPad Prism
version 9.4.1 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California
USA). A threshold of
p
≤ 0.05 was used to
determine the significant differences between the two experimental
groups. All WB experiments were performed in technical triplicate
and target/whole protein relative density ratios were averaged between
the same samples for analysis.
Results
Localization and anatomical orientation across
different views
of the Hippo in the rat brain are shown in
Figure
1
A. Protein abundance in protein extracts
of the Hippo was consistent across all analyzed samples (
Figure
1
B).
Figure 1
Initial checks for following
proteomic analyses in double-blasted
vs sham rats. (A) Digital 3D rendering of the whole rat hippocampus
(yellow) to demonstrate localization and orientation of the hippocampus
that was microdissected out from SH and 2xBl rat brains, with corresponding
2D coronal section image to visualize anatomical markers for dissection
accuracy [3D rendering, courtesy of the Harris Lab: University of
Texas at Austin (SynapseWeb, Kristen M. Harris, PI,
http://synapseweb.clm.utexas.edu
)]. (B) Distribution of protein abundances in each hippocampus sample
was determined to be sufficient for proteomic analysis. The interquartile
range (IQR) of each sample is illustrated, with dots above or below
this range representing proteins with abundances outside the IQR and
which may be considered outliers.
A total number of 9284 proteins was identified,
with 67,724 peptide
groups sequenced from 196,151 PSMs at 5% FDR (
Table S1
). PCA plots (
Figure
2
A) and heat map (
Figure
2
B) show that protein abundances in 2xBl vs SH groups
were mostly separated with very few overlapping animals (two SH animals
among the 2xBl group, one 2xBl animal among the SH group, see
Discussion
).
Figure 2
Differential clustering of 2xBl vs SH
(control) rats. (A) PCA of
proteomic profiles shows distinct differential clustering of 2xBl
(blue) vs SH (orange) hippocampal protein expression. (B) Heat map
of expression pattern clustering shows separation between samples,
where green indicates low and red indicates high differential protein
abundance. Hierarchal clustering of samples. Z-score transformation
of normalized protein abundances from a quantitative proteomics analysis
using isobaric mass tags was applied before performing the hierarchical
clustering based on Euclidean distance and complete (furthest neighbors)
linkage. The horizontal dendrogram shows the proteins in samples that
are clustered together. SH=sham (control); 2xBl=double blast; PCA=principal
component analysis
Specifically, 136 up-regulated and 94 down-regulated
proteins had
≥15%-fold change (Log2 fold change ≥0.2) and a ≤0.05
p
-value in the Hippo of 2xBl vs SH rats (
Figure
3
). Complete lists of up- and
down-regulated proteins are in the Supporting Information (
Tables S2
and
S3
).
Figure 3
Hippocampal
proteomic profiling of 2xBl vs SH (control) rats.
Volcano plot of log2(FC) vs –log10(
p
-value)
of hippocampal proteomic profiles, with up-regulated proteins on the
right (red) and down-regulated proteins on the left (green). Significance
threshold of
p
< 0.05 is indicated by shading,
with all significantly changed proteins with log2(FC) > 0.20 included
in our analysis shown in the corresponding color-shaded boxes. We
identified 136 up-regulated (red square) and 94 down-regulated (green
square) proteins within these criteria through proteomic profiling.
SH=sham; 2xBl=double blast
WB-quantification analyses confirmed the direction
of change to
be congruent with MS-proteomic outcomes for the selected protein targets.
However, only MAGI3 WB results reached a significance between 2xBl
vs SH groups (
Figure
4
A). KIFC2 showed a trend toward increased expression but was not
significant (
p
= 0.0786; see
Figure_S2
).
Figure 4
MAGI3 identified as having significantly increased abundance
in
the hippocampus after double-blast exposure. (A) Western blot verifies
the significantly increased abundance in the rat hippocampus in 2xBl
vs SH groups (
p
< 0.05) initially identified through
proteomic analysis. STRING software analyses of the top 10 (B) and
50 (C) protein interactions with MAGI3 identify potential mechanisms
of involvement in the brain’s response to double-blast exposure.
SH=sham (control); 2xBl=double blast
STRING Analysis
Our analysis of MAGI3 used the input
of MAGI3 against a
H. sapiens
background
and was restricted to 10 first shell interactors (
Figure
4
B) and 50 first shell interactors
(
Figure
4
C). Line thickness
demonstrates interaction confidence indicative of the strength of
the data support. The resulting networks reveal that MAGI3 interacts
with a large set of proteins frequently involved in mechanisms related
to neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation, including, among others,
beta-adrenergic and norepinephrine binding activities (
Table S4
). None of the direct interactors with
MAGI3 are differentially abundant in the 2xBl vs SH Hippo rat proteomic
data. To understand how MAGI3 may interact with proteins previously
investigated after explosive-driven double-blast exposure, a STRING
network was generated of the top 50 protein interactions following
input of MAGI3 as well as neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory
related proteins MAPT, APP, GFAP, and AIF1 (aka IBA1) (
Figure
5
A), and additionally SYP, GAP43,
DLG4, MBP, PPP1R9B, PDPN, LYVE1, PDFGB, POLB, S100B, GSK3B, PPP2CA,
NEFL, AQP4, and SPTAN1 (
Figure
5
B). Importantly, MAGI3 showed evidence of direct interactions
with CNTN2, CTNNB1, CACNG2, APBA1 and APBA2 (
Table S5
). These latter findings suggest that as a scaffolding protein
regulating various cellular and signaling functions at cell–cell
junctions, MAGI3 may potentially play a role in the structural organization
of axonal or synaptic binding domains as well as possible implications
for APP processing. Of the direct interactors in this neurodegenerative/neuroinflammatory
network, CLEC1B and PPP2R5B were also significantly increased in the
proteomic data.
Figure 5
Fitting MAGI3 into the broader network of neurodegenerative
protein
interactions. (A) STRING analysis of 50 closest protein interactions
following input of MAGI3 and 4 previously investigated proteins involved
in neurodegeneration after double-blast exposure (MAPT, APP, GFAP,
and AIF1) (Murphy et al., 2020),
17
demonstrating
possible interactions of MAGI3 within these protein networks. Subsequent
input of 19 previously investigated proteins plus MAGI3 revealed further
possible involvement of MAGI3 within this neurodegenerative network
(B).
17
,
18
DAVID Analysis
GO enrichment analysis of the input
135 proteins with differential abundance after double-blast exposure
identified 5 significantly (
p
< 0.05) enriched
molecular functions (
Figure
6
A), 7 significantly enriched cellular components (
Figure
6
B), and 14 biological
processes (
Figure
6
C). This analysis suggests that molecular functions involving hyaluronic
acid binding, protein binding, and ion channel binding may be impacted
by the observed proteomic changes following double-blast exposure.
Cellular components that may be affected by double primary blast injury
include synapses and membranes. Biological processes potentially affected
include calcium homeostasis, synaptic transmission, and cell adhesion
(
Table S6
).
Figure 6
DAVID analyses of differentially
abundant hippocampal proteins
identified through proteomic analysis of double-blasted vs sham rats.
Following input of a condensed list of 135 proteins identified through
proteomic analysis as having differential abundance in the hippocampus
after double-blast exposure, DAVID enrichment analysis of GO relationships
revealed 5 molecular functions (A), 7 cellular components (B), and
14 biological processes (C) as potentially significantly affected.
Discussion
MS-based proteomic studies have rarely been
used to assess proteomic
profiling changes occurring in different regions of animal brains
exposed to either environmentally or experimentally generated repeated
explosive-driven blast exposures. This gap of knowledge acquires special
relevance considering that the central nervous system (CNS), and the
brain in particular, is a highly complex tangled cluster of neurocircuits
intracranially organized and disposed in specialized structures and
locations. Consequently, particularly in the context of TBI and even
more so in blast-TBI studies, based on the anatomical orientation
and cytoarchitectonic features of each brain region, different cerebral
areas and neurocircuits can be differentially vulnerable in relation
to the different types and kinetics of the impacting energies. Indeed,
a differential brain region-based explosive-driven blast sensitivity
has been demonstrated in previous studies.
17
,
18
,
29
Also, a similar but not directly comparable
(different animal species, different blast conditions, and full brain
but not specific regions analyzed) proteomic study performed in mice,
described elevation of molecules such as phospho-tau that are directly
linked to conditions such as AD.
30
Indeed,
our previous findings in rats’ brains detected similar molecular
changes (pTau) in specific brain regions, including hippocampus.
17
Based on this region-based blast sensitivity
across the brain,
we focused our initial analyses on the primary blast wave effects
on the Hippo, a brain region well-known to be coupled with memory
and specific-modality memory functions and circuits. Importantly,
based on MS-proteomic principles, we did not assume any specific protein
abundance change in either up- or down-regulated direction in the
Hippo of double-blasted (2xBl) vs non-blasted (SH) animals.
In general, our analyses (see orange vs blue dots in the PCA graph,
Figure
1
A) showed that the
repeated (twice) explosive-driven exposure determined the separation
of two main proteome-change-related groups. This separation was not
present for all animals in each group since a few overlapping cases
were present. This PCA outcome though is not surprising due to natural
(neuro)biological variability present across mammals (especially non-transgenic
animals) and even present when studying animals (including rodents)
that are quite homogeneous as for the genotype/phenotype background
like in our case.
Based on our stringent protein target selection
criteria, the data
show that the expression levels were up-regulated for KIFC2 and MAGI3
in the Hippo of 2xBl vs SH rats. However, only MAGI3 was confirmed
to be up-regulated also by WB-verification analyses. The fact that
only one (MAGI3) of the probed protein targets identified by MS-proteomic
procedures was confirmed by the WB data is neither new nor surprising.
In fact, due to the different types of physical methods used in proteomics
vs WB, multiple factors can interfere with the consistency between
these two quantitative approaches. Among these factors, the commercial
availability of the antibodies selected for WB quantifications, conformational
changes of the antigens and antibodies of each specific molecule examined,
and other either biochemical or manufacturing factors could explain
the discrepancies observed. Based on these considerations and despite
possible technical nuances, it is still relevant that MAGI3, a scaffold
protein mainly known to be involved in oncogenic pathomechanisms,
was shown to be coherently up-regulated in its abundance as indicated
by both proteomic and WB analyses.
It is indeed intriguing that
MAGI3, a protein principally studied
in the context of cancer mechanisms,
31
,
32
was up-regulated
in the Hippo of 2xBl vs SH rats. MAGI3 is known to interact with a
number of important signaling cascades, including ERK, AKT, WNT, and
JNK pathways, with possible roles in DNA-repair pathways, cell-to-cell
junction interactions, and angiogenesis.
25
MAGI3, while it has never been reported in explosive-driven blast
studies before, represents actually an important scaffolding protein
that belongs to the widely expressed MAGI protein family,
33
with MAGI1 and MAGI3 being ubiquitous, and MAGI2
expressed in the brain and kidney tissues. In particular, MAGIs allow
the precise tuning of molecular effectors, and more specifically subcellular
domain effectors, as well as the stimulation of distinct pathways,
simultaneously or in coordination, with other either positive or negative
signals to hinder, or alternatively synergize, specific genome-activated
cellular responses.
25
Remarkably,
MAGI3 elevated levels predict a good prognosis of ovarian
cancers
34
and lower tumor grade and prognosis
in human gliomas but, surprisingly, limited data are available on
the MAGI3 function in the context of neuronal or brain studies in
general. However, a molecule belonging to the same family, MAGI2,
has been shown to be essential during synaptic scaffolding activities.
35
Furthermore, MAGI2 has specific interactions
with beta-adrenergic receptors.
36
Likewise,
MAGI1, apart from its scaffolding and tumor-suppressive properties,
has also been found to have vascular functions, especially in the
endothelium, including brain vasculature. Additionally, due to the
essential scaffolding function of the MAGIs across tissues, including
the brain, MAGI1, for example, has been associated with tuning of
neuronal channels regulating excitability and pain.
37
It is worth noting that while our analyses focused on the
Hippo, it is not excluded that MAGIs and MAGIs-interacting protein
expression changes could be altered also in other brain regions due
to their quasi ubiquitous distribution across the CNS and other body
organs.
In the context of our proteomic analyses and based on
STRING protein–protein
interactions, MAGI3 showed interactions with a wide series of proteins
classically involved in neurodegenerative mechanisms, including also
all those proteins assessed in our previous analyses such as MAPT,
APP, GFAP, and IBA1 (aka AIF1). Besides these proteins, STRING data
suggested that MAGI3, at the hippocampal level at least, interacts
with a much wider group of proteins at different cellular and subcellular
levels. Among these proteins, CNTN2, APBA1, and APBA2 acquire a distinct
interest due to their observed involvement in various molecular and
clinical conditions.
38
In particular, CNTN2
would certainly deserve further investigations since it has been demonstrated
to be implicated in various neurodevelopmental processes
39
,
40
and psychiatric conditions,
41
,
42
which could have indeed
a major pathogenetic relevance for blast-TBI related syndromes and
PTSD in particular.
We speculate that forthcoming proteomic-brain-region-based
studies
in animal and human brain samples will further shed light on the peculiar
metabolic and synaptic long-term aspects of repeated blast exposure
and TBI in general. In fact, the possibility that a common molecular
pathway could characterize both blast and nonblast TBI exposure would
represent an important point of pathogenetic confluence between different
types of TBI and causative energy dynamics. Finally, the MS-based
proteomic approach appeared to be a very robust tool for both qualitative
and quantitative analyses in support of the ABIMAS working hypothesis.
The ABIMAS hypothesis postulates that one of the consequences of repeated
primary blast waves consists in the initiation of an altered asymptomatic
preclinical molecular status, termed ABIMAS,
18
in the absence of measurable behavioral changes.
17
ABIMAS would indeed signify a preclinical (absence of phenotypic/behavioral
changes) predisposing condition that could evolve toward a complete
resolution in the absence of additional traumatic events, or alternatively,
toward progression of neurodegenerative consequences if aggravated
by additional detrimental factors such as further blast- or blunt-TBI
events, mutual interactions with genetic and environmental risk factors
(APOE4 genotype, drug abuse, etc.), persistency of PTSD, other illnesses,
and any other aging and nonaging related conditions. The ABIMAS concept
has been primarily formulated based on previous observations showing
that region-specific molecular changes measured in double-blasted
rats were not necessarily accompanied by obvious or detectable behavioral
or histopathological changes after 15 days from the second blast,
17
,
18
an interval of time roughly translating to 1 year of life in human
terms.
43
If the ABIMAS hypothesis will
be confirmed, for example, by measuring additional molecular abnormal
events across different brain regions and their correlates in the
peripheral blood, it will represent a useful research construct to
identify preventive, mitigation, or effective treatments for some
of those clinical phenomena, especially neurological and psychiatric
manifestations, related to repeated blast-TBI consequences, whose
pathophysiology remains still largely obscure.
Limitations
Whereas these new proteomic findings in
the hippocampus of rats exposed to repeated explosive-driven blast
waves together with the previous sets of molecular changes detected
in other regions of the brain are in support of the ABIMAS hypothesis,
some caveats are present. In fact, it still remains to be investigated
if the ABIMAS status could progress toward phenotypically manifested
and measurable behavioral changes (i.e., anxiety disorders, memory
deficits, fear conditioning alterations, and others) at any time point
later than 15 days (i.e., 6 or 12 months after repeated primary blast
wave exposure). Additional studies are also necessary to define precise
dose–effect curves of repeated primary blast wave effects across
different brain regions under similar (explosive-driven) experimental
conditions. Indeed, factors such as the use of identical or different
blast intensities at each exposure, head position, body orientation,
lungs, and other organ damage are all factors that could modify either
pathological or behavioral aspects of repeated primary blast wave
effects on the brain. ABIMAS timing, for example, could be shifted
to an earlier or later time point after exposure based on the various
combinatorial effects of all the above-described factors. Moreover,
it remains still unknown if the various brain regions and ABIMAS timings
are differentially affected by repeated primary blast waves not only
in relationship to the above-described factors but also as an effect
of the combination of additional phenomena associated with body-brain
acceleration/deceleration or rotation of the head, which can be associated
with brain lesions such as brain contusions, diffuse axonal injury,
peri- and vascular damage, cerebral drainage deficits, and others,
which were indeed greatly minimized in our experimental paradigm.