Introduction
An important part of the adaptive immune
system is represented
by B cells. They express a unique B cell receptor (BCR) that recognizes
and binds to antigens in a very specific manner. The uniqueness and
specificity of these BCRs originates from the way they are formed,
namely by the somatic recombination of V-, D-, J-, and C-germline
segments.
1
,
2
This recombination of segments can, in theory,
generate more than 10
13
possible BCRs, with each targeting
a specific antigen.
3
,
4
Once an antigen is bound to its
cognate BCR, the B cell is activated and starts to proliferate and
produce antibodies. The produced antibodies are secreted and spread
throughout the body to target specific antigens.
2
Techniques that are available to investigate the B cell
response can focus on either the BCRs, e.g., BCR sequencing techniques
at the DNA or RNA level,
4
,
5
or on the generated
antibodies, e.g., by using ELISA-based techniques. Although ELISA-based
techniques can give insight into the total quantity of antibodies,
sometimes even with isotype resolution, these assays cannot resolve
antibodies at the clonal level.
6
Distinguishing
between antibodies at the clonal level is challenging due to the vast
array of antibody sequence variants and the added-on variability induced
by N- or O-glycosylation present on the Fc part of the antibodies.
Notwithstanding these challenges, we need to distinguish antibodies
at the clonal level to better understand the immune system and find
new potential candidates for monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy development.
To fill this gap, techniques that can focus at the protein level on
the antibody repertoires, e.g., Ig-seq
4
,
7
and liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based antibody clonal profiling,
8
,
9
are essential.
We recently introduced an LC-MS-based method
to profile antibody
clonal repertoires qualitatively and quantitatively. For antibody
clonal profiling, we remove the constant Fc part from the antibodies
by using specific antibody hinge-cleaving proteases. Removing the
Fc part isolates the variable Fab-fragments and makes the analyte
molecules simpler to analyze by eliminating the Fc glycosylation sites.
The resulting intact Fab molecules, which contain all six CDRs from
the light and heavy chain, can then be analyzed using an LC-MS-based
approach that distinguishes unique clones by their mass and retention
time.
8
The antibody clonal profiling
method relies heavily on the antibody
hinge-cleaving protease. Such a protease should be very specific and
should not exhibit a bias in cleaving certain antibodies better than
others. Several bacteria produce proteases that cleave IgG’s
as an evasion tactic against host immunity, and several of these have
now been described, characterized, and used for applications in biotechnology,
biopharma, and middle-down proteomics.
10
IgdE is such a specific IgG1 hinge-cleaving protease that is often
used and which we also used in the clonal profiling method initially.
8
,
11
IgdE is a cysteine protease that is derived from the pathogen
Streptococcus agalactiae
. This protease cleaves uniquely
human IgG1s at one specific site just above the hinge region, namely,
at KSCDKT/HTCPPC. For activity IgdE does not need any reducing conditions
or cofactors. While IgdE is very specific, it has not yet been demonstrated
that it cleaves equally efficiently (without bias) for all IgG1 clones
in circulation.
Recently, another protease was described: BdpK
that can also cleave
IgG1 in its hinge-region. BdpK is a serine protease that is derived
from the nonpathogenic bacteria
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus
. This bacterium is harmless to humans but predates other bacteria
by its high enzyme-to-chromosome ratio that enables them to hydrolyze
most macromolecules from other bacteria.
12
Although
B. bacteriovorus
is harmless to humans,
BdpK is a broad-acting protease. Among these substrates, it cleaves
human IgG1, at one specific site, also just above the hinge region,
namely, at KSCDK/THTCPPCP. The cleavage site targeted by BdpK is therefore
one Threonine amino acid closer to the N-terminus of IgG1 compared
to IgdE. BdpK also does not need any reducing conditions but does
need calcium ions as cofactor. The specificity of BdpK arises from
the tertiary structure of IgG and the exposure of only one single
lysine residue located in the hinge region of IgG1 and hence is specific.
This specificity is similar to broad-acting proteases, like KGP or
trypsin, but different than other broad-acting proteases that are
known to digest IgG1 above the hinge region, like papain.
13
Papain is clearly less specific in digesting
human IgG1, as it cleaves the molecule at different sites, rendering
papain less suitable for LC-MS-based IgG1 Fab clonal profiling.
14
Here, we directly compared and evaluated
the performance of IgdE
and BdpK for plasma IgG1 repertoire profiling by LC-MS. This is the
first report that describes BdpK for the digestion of polyclonal plasma
IgG1s and that describes the possible biases introduced by either
IgdE or BdpK. Our data reveal that BdpK can digest polyclonal plasma
IgG1 specifically and efficiently and that neither BdpK nor IgdE introduces
detectable biases in the clonal repertoire profiles. This latter feature
is important for the unbiased qualitative and, especially, quantitative
profiling of antibody repertoires.
Methods
Plasma IgG
Purification and Fab Generation Using IgdE and BdpK
We first
performed experiments to test the performance of the hinge-cleaving
proteases IgdE (FabALACTICA, Genovis AB, Lund, Sweden) and BdpK (FabDELLO,
Genovis AB, Lund, Sweden) for Fab clonal profiling. The experiments
followed procedures described previously
8
and used buffers and conditions optimized for each protease following
the vendors’ information. All experiments were conducted on
donor plasma from the same source. For more details about the healthy
donor plasma used, see
Experimental S1
in
the Supporting Information. For IgdE we used a phosphate buffer (PB)
of 150 mM (pH 7), and for BdpK we used tris buffered saline (TBS)
with 10 mM CaCl
2
(pH 7.6) throughout the entire protocol.
IgG was purified from plasma by using 20 μL of CaptureSelect
FcXL affinity matrix slurry (Thermo Fisher Scientific), added to Pierce
Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The affinity matrix was washed
three times by using the preferred buffer for the corresponding protease.
For each washing step the liquid was removed by centrifugation for
1 min at 500
g
, at room temperature. Then, we added
10 μL of plasma, together with 150 μL of the corresponding
buffer, to every column. The samples were subsequently incubated under
shaking conditions for 1 h at room temperature. After incubation,
the flowthrough was collected, and the affinity matrix with bound
IgGs was washed 4 times using 200 μL of the corresponding buffer.
Finally, for the IgdE-treated plasma samples, we added 50 μL
of PB, 150 mM (pH 7) containing 50 arbitrary units of IgdE (FabALACTICA,
Genovis AB, Lund, Sweden). For the BdpK treated plasma samples, we
added 50 μL TBS buffer with 10 mM CaCl
2
containing
50 arbitrary units BdpK (FabDELLO, Genovis AB, Lund, Sweden). The
IgdE treated samples were incubated on a thermal shaker at 37 °C
for 16 h, and the BdpK-treated samples were incubated at 37 °C
for 2 h. After incubation with either IgdE or BdpK, the flowthrough
containing the Fab fragments generated from the bound IgG1s was collected
by centrifugation for 1 min at 500
g
. Next, to analyze
and profile the released Fab fragments, we employed a reversed-phase
liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and data processing
method, as previously described.
8
,
9
Details about the LC-MS
experiment and subsequent data processing method are described in
Experimental S1
in the Supporting Information.
Results and Discussion
Experimental Design
To chart and
monitor plasma IgG1
repertoires qualitatively and quantitatively, we recently described
a mass spectrometry-based approach that can be used to distinguish
antibodies at the clonal level. In this approach, we used the well-characterized
IgG1 hinge-cleaving protease IgdE to cleave off and analyze the IgG1
Fab fragments. At that time, IgdE was the only known protease that
was fully specific in cleaving IgG1 above the hinge region without
the need of denaturing or reducing conditions. As we did not have
a clear benchmark, we could not exclude whether IgdE may exhibit biases,
cleaving some IgG1 molecules better than others, which could affect
the quantitative aspect of the clonal profile. Recently, the second
IgG1 cleaving protease BdpK was discovered. BdpK is a broad-acting
protease that also cleaves the IgG1s very specifically above the hinge
region. IgdE and BdpK have adjacent albeit distinct cleavage sites,
whereby BdpK cleaves one Threonine amino acid closer to the N-terminus
of IgG1 compared to IgdE. Here, we set out to evaluate whether also
BdpK can be used for plasma IgG1 clonal profiling, benchmarking it
directly versus IgdE. Theoretically, when both proteases behave the
same for plasma IgG1 clonal profiling, we would expect identical clonal
profiles independent of which protease is used. The sole difference
would be that all Fab masses observed following BdpK digestion should
be 101 Da lower in mass due to the different but adjacent digestion
sites of the two used proteases (
Figure
1
).
Figure 1
Experimental design for the comparison of the
performance of BdpK
(green box) and IgdE (orange box) for LC-MS-based IgG1 Fab clonal
profiling. We used both proteases on the same plasma sample using
the optimized buffer conditions per protease. In the LC-MS-based IgG1
clonal repertoire profiling, we define unique clones by their mass
and retention time by the proteases
formed Fab fragments. The intensities of the LC-MS peaks are a direct
indication of the abundance of each detected clone. The masses of
Fab fragments originating from the same plasma IgG1 clone digested
by either BdpK or IgdE will always be 101 Da in mass apart due to
the distinct cleavage sites.
BdpK and IgdE Display Highly Similar Fab Clonal Repertoires
We acquired 6 distinct Fab-based LC-MS clonal profiles: 3 were
generated by using IgdE, and the other 3 by using BdpK. For both IgdE
and BdpK digestion, the same 3 plasma samples were used which were
taken at different time points from the same healthy donor. We compared
the mass plots of the clonal profiles present after IgdE digestion
with each other and with the mass plots of the clonal profiles present
after BdpK digestion performing hierarchical clustering (
Figure
2
). The clonal profiles
of the same donor at 3 different time points, generated by using the
same protease, correlate quite well. This is in line with our earlier
reported data which revealed that, in healthy donors, clonal profiles
are qualitatively and quantitatively relatively stable over a time
window of several months.
8
When naively
adopting the clustering to compare the clonal profiles generated by
either IgdE or BdpK we observed that these did not cluster at all
(cluster distance = 1). We next increased the masses of all the Fab
clones present after BdpK digestion by 101 Da to account for the extra
Threonine amino acid residue present on the C-terminus of the clones
digested with IgdE. After this correction the mass plots of all 6
profiles cluster well together with a cluster distance <0.05 (
Figure
2
A). Thus, the clones
present after both digestions are quantitatively and qualitatively
very alike (
Figures
2
,
S1
, and
S2
).
Figure 2
Comparison of the LC-MS-based IgG1 Fab clonal profiles generated
by BdpK and IgdE. (A) Hierarchical clustering of the 6 IgG1-Fab mass
plots generated from the Fab clonal repertoires of plasma from one
donor collected at 3 time points digested by either IgdE or BdpK.
The clustering is based on the correlation distance, before (top)
and after adjusting for a mass increase of 101 Da in BdpK-generated
Fab clones (bottom). (B) Deconvoluted mass plots of the same plasma
sample digested with BdpK (top trace, green) or IgdE (bottom trace,
orange). The colored clones represent the top 6 clones in both digests,
with a 101 Da difference corresponding to a Threonine (Thr) difference
in the digestion site. All plasma samples exhibited similar profiles,
independent of the protease used (see also
Figure S1
).
Efficiency of BdpK Seems
to Be Higher
Overall, BdpK
digestion yielded a higher number of detectable clones, namely, an
average of ∼700 clones per analyzed plasma sample, whereas
after IgdE digestion an average of ∼350 clones could be detected.
Also, the total sum (i.e., total ion current) of all clonal intensities
in the IgG1 repertoires was higher for the clones generated by BdpK
digestion when compared to IgdE digestion, ∼ 3.7 × 10
10
versus ∼2.4 × 10
10
sum intensity,
respectively.
These higher numbers of clones and higher total
sum of all clonal intensities originated primarily from low-abundant
clones that could be detected after BdpK digestion but were not detected
(i.e., below threshold) after IgdE digestion (
Figure S2
). We compared the intensities of the top-200 overlapping
clones detected in the IgG1 repertoires obtained after either digest,
and we observed that they matched very well (
Figure S2A
). When comparing the intensities of all clones detected
after either digest, thus also including the lower abundant clones,
we observed that they still matched very well with an overall correlation
(
R
2
) of ∼0.72. We also compared
the intensities of the overlapping clones detected in technical replicates
(using the same protease), which revealed a correlation ∼0.9.
This high correlation indicates that digestions by either IgdE or
BdpK are very robust and reproducible (
Figure S2B
) and that the obtained IgG1 Fab profiles correlate very
well not only qualitatively but also quantitatively.
Validation
of Shared Clonality by Top-Down Fragmentation of
Selected Clones
We aimed to find additional evidence to confirm
that the shared Fab clones between IgdE and BdpK digestions are indeed
identical. Therefore, we performed top-down MS/MS analysis, using
electron transfer dissociation (ETD), on several abundant “shared”
Fab clones. Conducting ETD on the intact Fab molecules mainly caused
the inter disulfide bridge between the light chain (Lc) and N-terminal
parts of the heavy chain (Fd) moieties to break, which allowed a comparison
of the masses of the Lc and the Fd for Fab clones produced by either
IgdE or BdpK. While the Lc masses of these shared clones were as expected
the same, the Fd masses were found to be always shifted by 101 Da,
corresponding to the extra Threonine (Thr) present on the C-terminus
following IgdE digestion (
Figure
3
).
Figure 3
Confirmation of shared identity between clones in the
IgdE or BdpK
digest through top-down ETD-based analysis. (A) Heatmap depicting
Pearson correlation values (ranging from 0 to 1) of raw top-down ETD
MS/MS spectra for Fab clones A and E (shown in
Figure
2
) and for the reduced Fab clones A and E,
generated by either IgdE or BdpK digestion. (B) Mirrored deconvoluted
top-down ETD MS/MS spectra of clone A generated by either BdpK (green,
top spectrum in the mirror plots) or IgdE (orange, bottom spectrum
in the mirror plots). These mirrored deconvoluted top-down ETD MS/MS
spectra are shown for intact Fabs (top spectrum) and for the reduced
Fab, Lc, and Fd chains (2 bottom spectra). The middle spectrum shows
the Fd fragment ions, and the bottom spectrum shows the LC fragment
ions.
Next, we conducted ETD on the
Lc and Fd separately, which we generated
by first reducing the Fab clones using TCEP. This reduction of the
Fab clones followed by ETD allowed a more detailed comparison of the
sequences of the Lc and Fd fragments of the shared Fab clones. While
the
z-
type fragment ions dominated the mass spectrum,
we also detected several
c-
type fragment ions. The
masses or
m
/
z
’s of the
c-
type fragment ions of both the Lc and Fd fragments were
identical for shared clones generated by either IgdE or BdpK digestion.
In contrast, the
z-
type fragment ions of the Fd showed
for each fragment ion a mass shift of 101 Da. This observation makes
perfect sense, as the distinct digestion sites of the proteases are
at the C-terminus of the Fd (
Figure
3
B).
The differences between the
c-
and
z-
type fragments found for both the Lc and
Fd fragments are also reflected
in the extracted Pearson correlation (
r
) values when
comparing the raw top-down fragmentation data of two “shared”
clones. The fragments of the Lc of the same clone digested with the
two different proteases shows a reasonable correlation, 0.45 for clone
A and 0.33 for clone E, while the Fd shows a much lower correlation,
0.13 for clone A and <0.5 for clone E. Both the values for the
Lc and Fd are higher for clone A compared to clone E, which can be
explained by the intensities of the clones: while clone A was the
highest abundant clone in the profile and showed a rich fragmentation
spectrum, clone E was lower abundant, reflected also by a less rich
fragmentation spectrum. As a result of this less rich fragmentation
spectrum, the
c-
type fragment ions, which were supposed
to be similar after both digestions, were almost absent. Correlation
analysis of the top-down MS/MS spectra of two different clones (A
vs E) proved to always be <0.05 (
Figure
3
A). In summary, this top-down ETD fragmentation
data provides additional confirmation that the “shared”
clones observed following IgdE and BdpK digestion, characterized by
identical retention time and a mass difference of 101 Da, are indeed
identical clones with identical sequences.
Conclusion
In
this study, we directly compared the applicability of the proteases
IgdE and BdpK for plasma IgG1 clonal profiling by liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Our data indicate that BdpK
can digest polyclonal plasma IgG1s specifically and, very crucially,
that neither BdpK nor IgdE introduces substantial qualitative or quantitative
biases in the detected clonal profiles. This validation reinforces
our initial assumption that the Fab clonal profiles generated by both
IgdE and BdpK truly reflect the antibody profile in blood. BdpK was
found to be more efficient than IgdE in digesting polyclonal plasma
IgG1s.
Additionally, when used in combination, both proteases
can aid
in the
de novo
sequencing of intact Fabs. This combination
can distinctively assign top-down fragments to either the Lc or the
Fd of the antibody by looking at the mass difference of the alike
fragment ions between the different digests. When the fragments show
no difference in mass for the C- and N-terminal fragments, they are
Lc fragments. Conversely, when a 101 Da difference is observed for
the C-terminal fragments, they can be considered to be Fd chain fragments.
This assignment of top-down fragments may benefit the
de novo
sequencing of antibody clones, as the assignment to the different
chains is often a challenge when performing top down
de novo
sequencing of intact Fabs as both Lc and Fd fragments appear in
the same fragmentation spectrum.