Introduction
Tauopathies are a group
of neurodegenerative disorders that feature
the pathological accumulation of aggregates containing microtubule-associated
protein tau.
1
,
2
The fibrillar forms of tau aggregates
are characteristically composed of a core region containing regularly
tightly packed monomer sequences rich in β-sheet structure that
are surrounded by more loosely packed or disordered N- and C-terminal
sequences termed the “fuzzy coat”.
3
−
5
Protease digestion
of tau fibrils isolated from patient samples defined the sequences
protected within the tightly packed core and suggested that (1) tau
can adopt multiple conformations in fibril structures and (2) specific
fibril structures tracked with individual tauopathies: Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), Pick’s disease (PD), corticobasal degeneration
(CBD), and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP).
6
−
15
The distinct features of tau fibril core structures from multiple
tauopathies have now been confirmed to atomic resolution by Cryo-electron
microscopy (Cryo-EM).
10
−
15
Prion-like properties have been ascribed to tau
16
,
17
in which the conformation of the tau aggregate promotes aggregate
propagation via cell-to-cell spreading and faithful recruitment and
templating of its structure to native tau monomers.
18
−
21
Tau aggregates isolated from
tauopathies and introduced to cells display differential requirements
for templating aggregation,
22
and when
AD, CBD, or PSP fibrils are injected into mice, they promote distinct
patterns of pathology that share qualities with the corresponding
human disease.
23
Thus, understanding the
mechanisms by which distinct tau aggregate structures are generated
and how they are linked to tauopathies would contribute to a better
molecular understanding of the genesis and progression of these diseases.
Over 50 mutations in the
MAPT
gene that encodes
tau have been linked to tauopathies.
24
The
collection of mutations show heterogeneity with respect to penetrance,
age of onset, clinical phenotypes, and their association with individual
tauopathies.
24
−
29
At the molecular level, individual tau mutations have also been
shown to differentially modulate tau biochemical properties, and cellular
dysfunction associated with pathogenesis. For example, intronic mutations
(and some missense mutations) alter the regulation of tau splicing
and the resulting composition of tau isoforms expressed.
30
−
32
Individual missense mutations have been shown to differ from wild-type
(WT) in one or more properties including aggregation propensity,
33
−
35
cellular aggregate seeding,
36
,
37
microtubule binding
and dynamics,
35
,
38
−
41
protein interaction partners,
42
,
43
post-translational modifications,
44
,
45
engagement
and processing by the protein quality control machinery,
43
,
46
−
48
and axonal functions.
49
,
50
Mice expressing
individual tau missense mutants produce distinct phenotypic profiles
in regard to cellular dysfunction, patterns and timing of tau aggregate
pathology, and behavioral deficits.
51
In
light of the evidence of multiple tau aggregate conformations linked
to tauopathies, we reasoned that one potential factor that could contribute
to the pathogenic effects of tau mutations is their ability to promote
the formation of alternate tau aggregates, which have not been extensively
investigated.
Although there have been previous studies of structural
differences
induced by a small subset of mutations in short synthetic constructs
of tau,
52
,
53
comparison of the effects of a broad set
of tau mutations in the context of full-length tau has not been characterized.
One of the hurdles to this goal is the development of high-throughput
methods for the production of tau variants and comparisons of their
relative structures. To address this issue, we developed a high-throughput
approach for the expression and plate-based purification of recombinant
tau mutant proteins. This advancement allowed us to generate a panel
of 37 tau variants (WT + 36 missense mutants). Using low-volume, high-throughput
thioflavin T (ThT) and trypsin digestion assays, we profiled the rate
and extent of aggregation
in vitro
and the effects
of the mutations on the proteolytic sensitivity of the resulting fibril
core regions. This approach enabled us to perform a cross-comparison
of structural profiles with properties such as aggregation kinetics.
Strikingly, we found that a subset of missense mutations was sufficient
to alter the proteolytic sensitivity of tau fibrils when compared
to WT, which may partially explain their link to disease. More broadly,
we suggest that this experimental platform can be used and adapted
to systematically understand the complex relationships between tau
sequence, aggregation propensity, fibril structure, and cellular dysfunction.
Results
and Discussion
Validate a High-Throughput Tau Purification
Platform
Our first objective was to be able to directly compare
our 37 disease-associated
tau mutants with respect to multiple aggregation properties. Tau transcripts
are subject to alternative splicing, leading to the production of
multiple tau isoforms. Six major tau isoforms are prevalent in the
adult central nervous system (CNS) and differ in the inclusion/exclusion
of two N-terminal inserts (0N, 1N, or 2N) and three versus four microtubule
binding repeats (3R, 4R). For our study, we targeted the introduction
of familial mutations into the 0N4R tau isoform because it is a major
component of tau aggregates in multiple tauopathies (AD, PSP, CBD)
54
,
55
and it aggregates relatively rapidly
in vitro.
(
46
) We developed a platform for purifying recombinant
human 0N4R tau protein in a 96-well plate format (
Figure
1
A) so that all individual tau
mutants could be purified in parallel and the entire mutant panel
could be assayed across multiple protein preparations. Our small-scale
tau purification protocol retained the major procedures reported in
traditional large-scale methods including protein expression in
Escherichia coli
, boiling of the lysate, cation exchange
and buffer exchange into standard conditions (D-PBS, 2mM DTT, pH 7.4)
suitable for protein aggregation assays.
33
,
46
,
56
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of small-scale purified WT 0N4R tau migrated
as the expected full-length form, similar to the same tau construct
obtained from a traditional large-scale purification protocol (
Figure
1
B). Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis of
small-scale purified 0N4R WT tau detected a single major species at
44054
m
/
z
, closely corresponding
to the predicted full-length product (
Figure
1
C). To test the potential for cross-contamination
of proteins between individual wells, we purified two different isoforms
of tau (0N3R and 0N4R) arranged in alternating wells within the plate
(
Figure
1
D). The purified
samples were subjected to a dot blot with an antibody specifically
recognizing the 0N4R isoform. Antibody reactivity was only detected
in the purified 0N4R samples and not the 0N3R sample purified from
adjacent wells suggesting minimal/no cross-contamination occurs between
wells during purification. Each in-well purification yielded on average
>200 μg of purified tau prepped for downstream assays (
Figure S1A
).
Figure 1
Validation of high-throughput, small-scale
purification and aggregation
platform for recombinant tau. (A) Major components of the tau purification
and downstream assay platform. Tau constructs with encoded disease-associated
mutations are expressed in small-volume
E. coli
cultures and then lysed and purified in 96-well plates. (B) SDS-PAGE
comparison of purified WT 0N4R tau using a large-scale protocol or
our small-optimized scale protocol. The MW of tau is 44 kDa; however,
the protein migrates at an apparent MW of ∼50 kDa due to a
high number of positively charged residues. Results representative
of 3 independent protein preparations. (C) Mass spectrum of small-scale
purified tau demonstrating a single peak corresponding to the calculated
mass of the full-length protein. Results representative of 3 independent
protein preparations. (D) Dot blot demonstrating no cross-contamination
of tau samples during small-scale purification. Cultures overexpressing
0N4R or 0N3R WT tau were purified in alternating wells of a 96-well
plate. Purified proteins were transferred to dot blot while maintaining
their relative plate position: 4R = 0N4R, 3R = 0N3R. The blot was
probed with a 4R tau antibody (ET3) recognizing an epitope found in
4R but not 3R tau isoforms. (E) Aggregation kinetic curves for WT
0N4R tau purified using large-scale versus small-scale methods. Aggregation
reactions were initiated by introducing heparin to 10 μM tau,
and the reaction was monitored with ThT. The individual curves for
three technical replicates are plotted. (F) Comparison of lag time
values for WT 0N4R tau and mutants (G272V, P301L, E342V) purified
via large- or small-scale protocols. For each tau variant, individual
lag time values for three technical replicates (aligned dots), assayed
from three individual protein preparations (side-by-side columns of
dots) are plotted along with the mean for each experiment (bar). *
p
= < 0.05, **
p
= < 0.01, nested
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), post hoc Dunnett’s test.
Individual disease-associated mutations were introduced
into human
0N4R tau by site-directed mutagenesis and purified by using our small-scale
purification platform. SDS-PAGE analysis of the mutant constructs
isolated by the small-scale method demonstrated consistent purities
across the entire panel (
Figure S2
). We
then compared large- and small-scale purified tau in an
in
vitro
aggregation assay for a subset of tau mutants (WT,
G272V, P301L, E342V). Each tau mutant was assayed across three different
protein preparations for each purification method. Assays were carried
out in miniaturized 384-well format aggregation kinetic assays that
we previously developed,
46
which requires
less than 9 μg of tau protein per reaction. Tau aggregation
was tracked with the fluorescent amyloid dye Thioflavin T (ThT) following
the addition of a common aggregation accelerant, heparin. An example
of the kinetic aggregation curves obtained for large-scale versus
small-scale purified WT 0N4R tau is shown in
Figure
1
E.
Individual aggregation curves were
fitted to the Gompertz function
for comparative analyses of the shape of the curves with respect to
three parameters: lag time, amyloid formation rate constant, and amplitude.
Lag time represents the initial phase of aggregation, where the threshold
conditions for rapid amyloid accumulation have not been met. The amyloid
formation rate constant describes the net growth rate of amyloid fibrils
in the reaction. The amplitude parameter describes the plateau value
reached following the rapid amyloid formation phase. Between tau mutants
tested, similar relationships were observed with respect to the extracted
kinetic parameters (
Figures
1
F,
S1B,C
). For example, G272V tau
consistently aggregated with a lag time similar to that of WT, whereas
P301L tau had a significantly shorter lag time than that of WT (
Figure
1
F). Intrinsic variabilities
in these calculated kinetic parameters were similar between protein
samples from large-scale and small-scale purifications. Overall, these
results support that tau purified using small-scale methods is comparable
to tau purified by classical large-scale methods and critically, allows
us to perform cross-comparisons of tau mutants for their aggregation
properties at a higher-throughput capacity.
Tau Disease-Associated
Mutations Drive the Formation of Aggregate
Structures Distinct from WT
We next determined whether single
tau mutations were sufficient to promote the formation of alternative
aggregate structures. As a readout of aggregate structure, we used
protease digestion of aggregated tau to identify tau fragments buried
in the tightly packed aggregate core that are more protected from
protease activity. The specific pattern of protected tau fragments
has been used to detect distinct aggregate species in both recombinant
tau and disease patient samples.
6
,
7
,
21
We first explored the kinetics of digestion for WT 0N4R tau with
the protease, trypsin. The tau protein contains trypsin sites spread
throughout its sequence at an average of one site every 8 residues
making it a robust sensor of changes in tau sequence accessibility/structure
(
Figure S3A
). WT 0N4R tau was incubated
with heparin and allowed to aggregate for 24 h prior to direct digestion
of the reaction with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (has enhanced
stability and no chymotrypsin activity) for 0, 1, 2, 3, 6, and 18
h. Capillary gel electrophoresis combined with total protein detection
was used to quantify the migration and relative amounts of trypsin-resistant
fragments. The technique is highly sensitive and can detect the fragments
produced from as little as 0.8 μg of a digested tau aggregate
sample.
Figure
2
A displays
the simulated lane view of the fragments for individual samples, and
Figure
2
B shows the chromatogram
profiles of the corresponding samples. Serendipitously, trypsin itself
is not detected in our profiles since the mass spectrometry grade
trypsin is modified at lysine residues utilized by the total protein
detection method. Monomer tau treated with trypsin was completely
digested to 2–3 kDa fragments within 1 h of trypsin treatment.
Undigested tau aggregates migrated at >40 kDa corresponding to
the
expected size of full-length tau. Loss of full-length tau after trypsin
addition coincided with the generation of smaller peptide fragments.
At 1 and 2 h digest time points, the pattern of produced fragments
was fairly consistent giving three major fragment peaks at 10, 16,
and 28 kDa and confirmed the presence of a stable core that is relatively
refractory to trypsin digestion of its internal sequences. Similar
to the digested monomer tau control sample, a major peak at 2 kDa
was also observed. Since our aggregated samples were not further purified
prior to trypsin treatment, the 2 kDa band likely corresponds to unaggregated
tau present within our original reactions. At 3, 6, and 18 h time
points, a shift of 1–2 kDa toward smaller MWs was observed
for each of the major fragments. For example, at the 3 h digest time
point, a 9 kDa band was detected along with the 10 kDa band. By 6
h, only the 9 kDa band was the major peak. These results likely suggest
prolonged trypsin treatment leads to increased digestion from the
core fragment ends. Based on these results, digestion reactions were
kept to <2 h for the remainder of the study. Using our digest conditions,
we directly compared the protease-resistant fragment profiles for
aggregates generated from WT tau and 36 disease-associated tau mutants.
Tau variants were small-scale purified in parallel, aggregated, and
trypsin-digested with the same reaction conditions. We observed that
a subset of tau mutants produced a digest fragment profile that differed
from WT tau. To systematically compare the trypsin digest fragment
profiles of individual samples and identify distinct profiles, we
developed an algorithm to process gel chromatogram data and perform
hierarchical cluster analysis (see the
Methods
section for details). Clustering is based on the similarity of the
overall shape of the chromatogram profile (relative peak heights and
distances). We restricted analysis to the 6–24 kDa range which
we observed more consistently detected signals from fragments above
background levels. We applied the analysis to a data set containing
three independent digest reactions for each tau variant within our
panel. Using a 90% threshold for similarity, the data set was binned
into 13 separate profiles (
Figure S4
) that
we term “structure groups” (SG). The representative
fragment profile for each structure group is presented in
Figure
2
C. The profile for
WT tau corresponds to the pattern for structure group 1 (SG1) and
the remaining structure groups are ordered as a function of decreasing
similarity score relative to SG1.
Figure
2
D shows a schematic of the distribution of
tau mutants in each structure group and their relative locations within
the tau sequence. In the corresponding table (
Table
1
), the structure group(s) of each tau mutant
are indicated.
Figure 2
Tau mutations promote aggregate structures distinct from
WT as
shown by altered trypsin digestion fragment profiles. (A, B) Time
course of trypsin digestion of WT 0N4R tau aggregates. Samples were
processed for capillary gel electrophoresis and total protein detection
(lysine-dependent labeling) of protease-resistant fragments. Trypsin
is not detected due to lysine modification of the protease. Results
represent three independent experiments. (A) Capillary lane view of
trypsin-resistant fragments following digestion with trypsin for indicated
times. Migration of MW standards (kDa) marked (left). (B) Corresponding
chromatograms from (A) for trypsin-digested aggregate samples. Major
peaks are marked by vertical dashed lines with MW. (C) Lane view of
representative digest profiles for SGs 1–13. Migration of MW
standards (kDa) marked (left). (D) 0N4R tau mutants plotted according
to their location within the tau sequence (
x
-axis)
and SG classification (
y
-axis). Numbering for
x
-axis corresponds to 2N4R tau isoform. A schematic of tau
with major sequence regions labeled is shown below graph: PP = polyproline
region, R1–R4 = microtubule binding repeat regions, red boxes
= aggregation motif locations. Hatched box marks sequence region not
included in the 0N4R tau isoform. Tau mutants that gave an alternate
profile in at least one experiment were classified as having variable
structure (orange lines, all SG marked for each mutant). (E–G)
Chromatograms of fragment profiles for indicated tau mutants over
the 6–24 kDa region. For the
y
-axis, signal
intensity is normalized with the maximal signal value set to 100%.
Each profile is colored according to mutant/SG. Matching colored arrowheads
mark the maxima of major peaks. (E) Representative fragment profiles
of three major structure groups defined in this study: SG1, SG4, and
SG9. (F) Replicate fragment profiles for WT 0N4R tau and P301L 0N4R
tau (
n
= 3 independent experiments). (G) Replicate
fragment profiles for the variable structure mutant, G272V 0N4R tau
(
n
= 3 independent experiments).
Table 1
Structure Group Classifications of
Tau Mutants Based on their Trypsin-Resistant Fragment Profiles
a
Individual
tau mutants are binned
into SGs 1–13 (columns). Mutants in the table are ordered in
rows based on their relative sequence location. Mutants with a consistent
SG across all independent experiments (
n
= 3) are
colored in black. Mutants binned into more than one SG are colored
red (2 experiments) and orange (1 experiment). The tau sequence region
associated with each mutant is indicated at the far right-hand column
of the table: PP = polyproline; R1–R4 = microtubule binding
repeat regions 1–4.
Within the panel, the majority of tau mutants binned into 3 major
structure groups: SG1, SG4, and SG9. Collectively, these groups matched
at least one replicate for 80% (29/36) of the tau mutant digest profiles.
Representative profiles comparing SG1, SG4, and SG9 are shown in
Figure
2
E. SG1 which represents
the fragment profile for WT tau was the largest grouping of mutants
(15/36) and included 10 tau mutants that invariably shared this profile
(e.g., A152T, P301S, G335V) and another 5 mutants that generated the
profile in at least 1 of 3 independent assays (e.g., G272V, V337M,
R406W). The tau mutants belonging to SG1 were spread across the tau
sequence, showing no clustering to a specific sequence region. Tau
mutants in SG4 (10/36) also did not show any association with a specific
location. SG4 contained relatively rare FTLD-tau mutations with the
exception of V337M which could generate more than one structure profile
(SG1 and SG4). SG9 contained 6 mutants (I260V, G272V, G273R, N279K,
L284R, L315R) that did seem to cluster in the first two microtubule
binding repeat regions of tau (R1–R2); however, one of the
mutants, L315R, was located further downstream in R3. Strikingly,
there was little to no overlap between the profiles generated for
the tau variants within SG1, SG4, and SG9; V337M was the only mutant
shared between major structure groups (SG1 and SG4). With respect
to the other structure groups, some contained just a single mutant
(G304S, G366R, K369I, P332S, Q336R, E342V, E372G), whereas other groups
contained up to 3 mutants. The core packing of aggregates for the
vast majority of the mutants we tested has not been previously characterized.
However, Aoyagi et al. have compared the packing of WT, P301L, and
R406W 0N4R tau via pronase treatment.
57
They found that the P301L mutation produced aggregates with a digest
fragment profile distinct from that of WT tau. We also found that
P301L tau consistently classified into a different structure group
(SG6) than WT (
Figure
2
F). The Aoyagi study
57
also reported that
WT and R406W tau aggregates shared a similar digest fragment profile.
In contrast, we detected that R406W tau aggregate structures could
be matched to the WT in only two out of three of our trials. For one
R406W tau aggregate reaction, we detected a packed core that was distinct
from WT. All of the aggregates formed by tau mutants in the panel
were confirmed to be positive for ThT binding in our aggregation kinetic
assays, indicating that they contain β-sheet-rich properties
characteristic of amyloids. Thus, our data set highlights the diversity
of amyloid structures formed by these disease-associated mutations
and offers evidence of how their pathological misfolding can be readily
differentiated from that of WT tau.
One key observation that
emerged from our large mutant panel analysis
was that a subset of mutants such as V337M generated more than one
digest fragment profile between experiments, which we termed “variable
structure” mutants. Within our panel, 30% (11/36) of the tau
mutants assayed had variable structure and are highlighted in
Table
1
(red and orange)
and in
Figure
2
D (orange).
These variable structure mutants, in general, displayed one structure
profile that fell into the major structure groups (SG1, SG4, or SG9)
and another alternate structure profile. An example of the digest
profiles generated by the variable tau mutant G272V is shown in
Figure
2
G. The alternate
structure could group with other mutant profiles (e.g., P301T, deltaK280,
and P301L group in SG6) or could be classified as a unique structure
in some cases (e.g., G366R = SG5, K369I = SG7, E342V = SG8). Since
we did not detect variable structures for WT and the majority of tau
mutants, it suggests that there is a predominant misfolding pathway
for most tau variants but that some mutations allow for the occurrence
of an early aggregate species or event that can shuttle tau down an
alternative divergent misfolding pathway(s).
Even with the large
panel of mutants analyzed, no clear relationships
could be identified between the biochemical changes in tau caused
by mutation and their classification into specific structural groups.
No overall trend was observed between the relative locations of the
mutations and their grouping in a structure group. The strongest trend
was observed for SG9 that contained several mutations clustered between
residues 260–284 but mutations within this sequence (deltaK280)
did not generate the same structure, and mutations outside the 260–284
region could also generate the SG9 fragment profile (L315R). We found
no correlations between changes in the protein’s isoelectric
point or hydrophobicity values and structure group classifications
(
Figure S3B,C
). We also observed that varying
the missense mutation at the same residue (e.g., G335 and P301) could
give rise to alternate structure groups. G335V gave a digest profile
matching WT tau, whereas G335S gave rise to an alternate digest profile
(SG2). At the P301 residue, mutation to a leucine (P301L) generated
aggregates classed into SG6 (
Figure
2
F), whereas mutation to a serine (P301S) gave rise
to aggregates similar to WT (SG1). Interestingly, the P301T mutation
fell into the variable structure category and could form both the
SG1 and SG6 structures. These results begin to reveal the complex
nature of the effects of tau mutations on aggregate structure formation,
where even subtle differences at a given residue can significantly
alter the reaction products.
Aggregation Kinetics of Individual Tau Mutants
Is Not a Predictor
of Distinct Aggregation Structure Profiles
We further probed
whether the alterations in aggregate structure we detected could be
linked to other tau properties, such as aggregation kinetics. We carried
in vitro
aggregation kinetic assays for the entire tau mutant
panel (WT and 36 mutants). We found that the extracted kinetic parameters
(lag time, amyloid formation rate constant, and amplitude) contained
some variation when tested across multiple independent experiments
and protein preparations, as expected (
Figures
3
A,
S5A,B
). For
WT tau, absolute calculated lag times varied from 1.04 to 2.5 h (median
= 1.41 h, quartiles = 1.21, 1.76). The largest variance in lag time
was observed for K298E tau (median = 3.84 h, quartiles = 1.89, 6.64).
We also noted that large variations in one kinetic parameter for a
mutant did not correlate with variability in other kinetic parameters.
For example, K298E showed relatively little variability in amyloid
formation rate constant or amplitude values compared to most mutants.
Within the panel, the P301 mutants (P301L, P301S, P301T) showed the
largest variation in amyloid formation rate constant values. There
was partial agreement between the heparin-induced aggregation kinetic
values we obtained and those reported in previous studies for tau
mutants. For example, P301L, P301S, and P301T mutants had significantly
decreased lag times compared to WT.
33
,
46
,
58
,
59
However, we were not
able to confirm previous evidence that other tau mutations (G272V,
N279K, V337M, R406W) in the context of full-length tau also drove
faster aggregation in the presence of heparin
33
or contrasting slower initial aggregation kinetics reported for
R406W.
33
,
59
In the case of N279 K tau, we observed a
significantly longer lag time than WT. The reason for this discrepancy
is unclear but aggregation kinetics can be modulated by variables
such as buffer conditions
60
,
61
and the tau isoforms
62
examined which differed between our current
study and previous studies. It is possible that the presence of mutations
in the context of other reaction conditions may differentially modulate
the aggregation kinetics.
Figure 3
Mutation-dependent alterations in tau aggregation
kinetics do not
predict changes in aggregate structures. (A) Lag time of individual
tau WT and mutants. The median (solid line) and quartiles (dotted
lines) are plotted for each variant (
n
≥ 9
replicates, ≥3 independent experiments). Brown-Forsythe and
Welch ANOVA was performed with post hoc comparisons to the WT tau
group.
p
= *<0.05, **<0.01, ***<0.0001.
(B) Comparison of WT and tau mutants with respect to amyloid formation
rate constant, lag time, and structure group classification. For each
tau variant, median lag time and amyloid formation rate constant values
are plotted (
n
≥ 9 replicates, ≥3 independent
experiments) and circles filled by determined SG(s) as designated
in the legend. Variable structure tau mutant data points are colored
with corresponding SG as half-circles. The quartile boundaries of
lag time and amyloid formation rate constant values for WT tau are
marked by dashed lines. Graph showing all assayed tau variants (left)
with gray boxed region expanded to aid in comparison of mutants clustered
in this region (right).
We next plotted the median
values for lag time against the amyloid
formation rate constant and structure group for all tau variants in
the panel (
Figure
3
B). We did not observe any clear trends between lag time or amyloid
formation rate constant and specific structure groups. For example,
tau mutants that promoted the formation of an alternative aggregate
structure to WT could still have WT-like aggregation kinetics. Groups
of tau mutants that were categorized to have the same aggregate structure
profile could have dissimilar aggregation kinetic values in the parameters
assessed. We also did not detect a relationship between amplitude
and structure groups (
Figure S5C
) or kinetic
parameters and variable versus consistent structure mutants (
Figure S5D
). Thus, variable aggregation kinetics
that we measured can not readily account for the propensity of individual
tau mutants to form alternate aggregate structures. However, it is
important to state that aggregation of tau, similar to other amyloidogenic
proteins, is a complex reaction where multiple types of molecular
level processes are occurring in parallel such as primary nucleation,
elongation, fragmentation, and secondary nucleation.
58
A limitation of our ThT kinetic assay methods is that they
capture only the net contribution of these processes in the production
of amyloid fibrils. It is possible that there is a significant correlation
between the formation of specific tau aggregate conformations and
aggregation subprocesses (e.g. fragmentation, elongation) that could
be identified with methodologies capable of measuring these specific
events.
63
,
64
Examining Changes in Tau Aggregate Structure
Profiles in the
Context of Cryo-EM Tau Fibril Structures
Current Cryo-EM
tau fibril structures contain WT tau isoforms. Thus, we hypothesized
that disease-associated mutations identified as forming alternate
aggregate structures in our digestion assays may also be more likely
to be incompatible with packing in the ordered fibril core. Mutagenesis
analysis for disease-associated mutations was carried out in PyMOL
on individual solved tau fibril structures for recombinant fibrils
and patient-derived fibrils from Alzheimer and CBD samples.
10
,
13
,
15
,
65
,
66
For each structure, predicted steric clashes
induced by mutation are reported in
Table
2
.
Figure
4
A maps the location of individual tau mutations and
their predicted clashes in the context of the sequences solved in
the Cryo-EM structures. We first focused on a fibril structure obtained
by aggregation of recombinant tau termed the “snake”
filament. All mutations predicted to cause a steric clash in our mutational
analysis (N279K, deltaK280, L284R, deltaN296, S305I) also produced
aggregate structure distinct from WT tau, supporting that these mutations
are incompatible with the observed packing in the fibril structure.
This was expected given these residues face toward the interface of
β-strand packing interactions (
Figure S6
). However, we also found that the majority of mutations in the known
ordered core region (with the exception of P301S and G303V) generated
alternate structures to WT tau in our digest assay, despite inducing
no detectable steric clash in our computational mutagenesis analysis.
Most of the mutated residue sites face outward from the resolved packed
core structure, and it is not readily clear how mutation at these
sites would induce fibril structure changes (
Figure S6
). Our results could indicate that (1) our WT tau fibril
structures are distinct from previously solved structures or (2) disease-associated
mutations may act on the misfolding pathway upstream of fibril formation
to alter the resulting aggregate structures produced (see discussion).
Another key observation is that our mutant panel coverage extends
beyond the solved regions for all current tau fibril structures. For
example, the recombinant tau fibril structure termed the “snake
filament” covers only 44% (16/36) of our examined mutations.
Out of the mutations that lie outside the solved structure region,
our digest fragment results suggest that 12/20 mutations induce the
formation of structures distinct from WT tau. This raises the possibility
that even though a mutation is not directly within the solved packed
core structure, it may still influence core packing through distal
interactions or induce local reproducible folding alterations in the
more flexible regions of the aggregate core.
Figure 4
Predicted effects of
disease-associated tau mutations in the context
of Cryo-EM tau fibril structures. (A) Schematic displaying the location
of tau mutations within sequence of indicated tau fibril structures
solved by Cryo-EM. The schematic plus PDB file information for structures
is summarized in
Table
2
. Top of the schematic indicates each mutation with respect to whether
the determined SG matches with WT tau (lines: yes = orange, no = blue,
and partial = green). For sequence regions included in Cryo-EM structures
(gray box), individual mutation sites are colored according to whether
they are predicted to cause a steric clash (red line) or not cause
a steric clash (black line). Mutation sites not solved in structures
are indicated as gray lines. (B) Cryo-EM density map (gray mesh) of
AD PHF tau fibril (PDB:
6HRE
). Individual protofibrils are shown as blue and green
backbone traces. Disease-associated mutations assayed in our study
are labeled on one protofibril (left) according to whether they are
predicted to cause a steric clash (red) or not (black). (C) Residues
surrounding residue V337 (blue backbone) in the same orientation as
(B) or rotated 90°. The V337M mutation is superimposed onto the
structure (white backbone), with predicted steric clashes with L357
indicated by red disks. (D, E) Epitope mapping of 10 kDa trypsin-resistant
fragment for WT 0N4R tau. (D) Chromatogram of capillary electrophoresis
immunoassay probed with tau antibodies DA9, ET3, and 77G7. (E) Tau
amino acid sequence for residues 200–400 with predicted 10
kDa fragment identity underlined in blue (arrow = potential C-terminal
ends). The epitope regions of ET3 (blue) and 77G7 (green) antibodies
are highlighted. Lysine and arginine residues at predicted trypsin
cleavage sites are colored in red.
Table 2
Predicted Effect of Tau Disease-Associated
Mutations on Tau Fibril Structures
a
a
Using
the trypsin digest fragment
profiles, mutations binned into the same structure group as WT tau
(SG1) versus mutations that bin into another group or only with WT
in some trials are labeled as Y(yes), N(no), or Partial, respectively.
Tau mutations were modeled into Cryo-EM resolved tau fibril structures
indicated using PyMOL. For each Cryo-EM structure analyzed, cells
are colored according to whether the mutations are predicted to cause
a steric clash (blue) or not (white). Mutations not present in solved
structures are colored as gray cells.
We also carried out an analysis of the compatibility
of disease-associated
mutations on structures determined for patient-derived fibrils (AD
and CBD). In the AD paired helical filament (PHF) structure, G335S/V,
Q336R, V337M, S352L, and G366R were predicted to cause clashes (
Figure
4
B). Optimized structures
of mutants templated onto AD PHF revealed additional potential incompatibilities.
S305I, D348G, V363I, and E372G in addition to all of the previously
noted mutants were predicted to have structural perturbations (
Table S1
). Similar to the recombinant tau fibril
analysis, we observed all mutations (except G335V, D348G, and V363I)
which were predicted to cause clashes formed alternate aggregate structures
in our digest assays. As an example, for the V337M mutation linked
to FTLD-tau in separate 3 families,
67
,
68
we predicted
it caused potential steric clashes with all patient fibril structures
examined: AD, CBD, and PSP
67
,
68
(steric clash shown
for AD PHF in
Figure
4
C). Our digest assays indicate that V337M has the propensity to form
non-WT aggregate structures. The finding that V337M and other mutations
are not compatible with structures linked to WT tau tauopathies raises
the possibility that their pathogenic properties may be due to their
inherent propensity to form alternate aggregate structures that promote
FTLD-tau specifically.
To gain more insight into the sequences
present in the packed core
region of our recombinant tau aggregates, we performed epitope mapping
of trypsin-resistant fragments by capillary gel electrophoresis. We
probed WT 0N4R digest fragments with individual tau antibodies (
Figure
4
D). Differential
positive or negative tau antibody reactivity and apparent MW of individual
fragments were used to narrow the identity of the 10 kDa fragment
to five potential sequence regions (
Figure
4
E). The five predicted sequences largely
overlap with the most N-terminal sequence fragment covering residues
267–369 and the most C-terminal fragment covering residues
274–375. The finding that this 10 kDa fragment is consistent
in our trypsin digest profile as one of the 3 major trypsin-resistant
bands produced suggests that it is a main component of the protected
core region of our aggregates. The predicted sequence coverage indicates
that it is larger than the region solved by Cryo-EM for recombinant
tau aggregates (272–330). The 10 kDa fragment more closely
aligns with trypsin-resistant core sequences identified for patient-derived
fibrils in CBD (268–369/387/395), PSP (260/268–395),
or genetic FTLD-tau (268–369/387/395).
7
It also overlaps with highly GluC-resistant sequence regions (223–380)
reported for 1N4R recombinant tau fibrils.
6
There remains much to be learned about how tau is able to
misfold
and aggregate into the multiple amyloid core confirmations observed
in tauopathies and how tau’s primary sequence contributes to
specific misfolding events. Our current study takes advantage of missense
mutations in tau linked to tauopathies to shed insight into the formation
of specific tau aggregate structures. We reveal that single missense
mutations introduced into human full-length 0N4R tau are sufficient
to modulate its misfolding pathway
in vitro
, leading
to the production of alternate aggregate structures. The high-throughput
tau purification platform we developed allowed us to perform direct
comparisons of 36 tau mutants and WT tau with respect to their aggregate
properties: structure and kinetics. We demonstrate the ability of
a subset of tau mutations to inherently modulate tau aggregate structure
formation, defining 13 distinct tau aggregate structure profiles within
our panel. Our results offer a view into the complexity of the relationship
between tau primary sequence and aggregation and provide a roadmap
with which to systematically begin to dissect the fundamental principles
underlying tau misfolding and aggregation.
Several atomic resolution
structures have been determined for tau
fibrils derived from tauopathies. However, the ability to perform
similar studies in the case of familial tau mutations linked to tauopathies
are limited by the extremely rare incidence of these mutations in
general, with some mutations being reported in as few as 2 cases
69
,
70
(e.g., deltaK280). Our
in vitro
methods with recombinant
tau protein provide an opportunity to directly test how tau mutations
modulate aggregate structure formation under controlled and consistent
conditions. The current study specifically examined the effects of
tau mutations in the context of the 0N4R tau isoform. The results
form a foundation in which to test other variables that may influence
tau aggregate structure formation. For example, six tau isoforms are
normally expressed in the neurons of the adult CNS
71
and it will be interesting to test if tau mutation effects
on aggregate structure are applicable across all isoforms or behave
similarly in aggregation reactions where multiple tau isoforms are
present. Individual disease-associated tau mutations have been shown
to cause tau aggregate pathology that consists primarily of 3R, 4R,
or a mixture of tau isoforms.
29
,
41
In some cases, the
inclusion of some tau isoforms but not others in aggregates may be
caused by preferential expression of isoforms via mechanisms such
as differential splicing.
30
−
32
However, another possibility
is that some tau mutations drive isoform-specific promotion of pathogenic
tau aggregate structures or ineffectively template some tau isoforms.
This is plausible given that another group has already found differences
in the packed core conformations between 1N3R and 1N4R heparin-induced
aggregates including an additional protease protected C-terminal sequence
region for 1N3R.
6
Tau aggregate structures
can also be modulated by the accelerants
72
or buffer conditions
73
of the aggregation
reaction. The packed fibril core of tau fibrils shows distinct conformations
when aggregation is initiated by heparin,
65
RNA,
73
,
74
or phosphoserine.
73
Using our assays, we can begin to tease out the relative contributions
of tau primary sequence and other additional cofactors, which may
offer additional insight into how tau aggregation can be triggered
in living cells.
In this study, we do not address the potential
interplay between
tau disease-associated mutations and post-translational modifications
(PTMs) on modulating the formation of alternate aggregate structures.
Tau has over 100 identified PTMs grouped in multiple categories such
as phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, glycosylation, proteolysis,
and ubiquitination (for recent reviews, see refs (
76
,
77
)). Hyperphosphorylation and individual phosphorylated
sites are examples of PTM changes that have been linked to tau aggregate
pathology in tauopathies.
In vitro
studies have demonstrated
that the introduction of PTMs to tau can modulate its aggregation
propensity.
78
−
81
However, there is evidence that the tau PTM landscape in tauopathies
is complex. For example, heterogeneous mixtures of multiple PTMs are
detected within cellular tau populations isolated from Alzheimer’s
Disease patients and the associated PTM patterns vary according to
disease stage.
75
Moreover, it is currently
difficult to discriminate which tau PTMs directly promote aggregation
versus PTMs occurring on aggregated structures. Thus, future efforts
should explore the degree to which our observed disease-associated
mutation-induced effects on aggregate structure can be reinforced
or neutralized in the context of the presence of individual PTMs (or
PTM combinations).
We chose trypsin to identify changes in the
protease resistance
of tau aggregates because the high incidence of regularly spaced lysine
and arginine residues throughout the tau sequence (
Figure S3A
) made it a sensitive indicator of structure changes
that could be easily mapped. A potential caveat of our trypsin digest
experiments is that multiple disease-associated mutations involve
changes to or from lysine(K) and arginine(R) residues. Thus, it is
possible that new aggregate structure profiles could be the result
of gain or loss of a trypsin cleavage site. However, our data does
not support this as being a general effect of K/R mutations. First,
multiple mutations spread across different locations in tau (e.g.,
K298E, K317M, G366R, K369I) can produce the same trypsin-resistant
profile binned as structure group 4 (SG4). Second, mutations such
as L315R and Q336R introduce a new tryptic site located in the middle
of the sequence of all available Cryo-EM structures as well as the
10 kDa fragment (residues within 267–375) identified in our
WT tau digestion profile. Yet, a banding pattern reflective of trypsin
digestion at this newly introduced site, which would essentially cleave
the 10 kDa band into two smaller fragments, is not observed (
Figure S7
). Thus, we contend that tau mutants
in our study involving K or R mutations can modulate tau aggregate
core packing leading to the observed changes in protease-resistant
profiles.
An unexpected finding from our study is that the effects
of mutations
on aggregate structures are not readily reconciled with current atomic
resolution structure data on recombinant tau fibrils.
65
Several tau mutations that were predicted to be compatible
with the fibril core solved by Cryo-EM generated aggregate structures
distinguishable from those of WT. Moreover, tau mutations outside
the region of the solved core structure were also found to alter aggregate
structure formation. There could be several reasons to explain these
discrepancies. Cryo-EM structures of recombinant tau induced in the
presence of heparin use the 2N4R tau isoform.
65
It is possible that the specific tau isoform or other reaction conditions
used in the previous study lead to an aggregate structure distinct
from those generated by our conditions. Another possibility is that
tau mutations alter upstream misfolding events that shuttle the misfolding
pathway toward the production of alternate aggregate structures. In
the case of tau mutations located outside the solved packed core region,
we also postulate that mutation effects could be due to changes in
the packing in more open and flexible structured regions of fibrils.
For WT 0N4R tau, we mapped our 10 kDa fragment to a region within
residues 267–375. All but two of the tau mutations that altered
the aggregate structure (I260V and R406W) in this study are contained
within this region. Thus, our results offer new insights into how
tau’s primary sequence may contribute to shaping the tau aggregate
structure in regions not yet resolvable by techniques such as Cryo-EM.
Using our new high-throughput methods for tau purification and
our trypsin digest assay for comparing aggregate structures, we hope
to assist in defining the complex relationships between tau sequence,
aggregate properties, and the biological effects of aggregates at
the cellular and
in vivo
levels. Multiple factors
can contribute to the pathogenicity of a disease-associated tau mutation.
Tau mutations such as P301L enhance the propensity of tau to aggregate,
however, this is not the case for other tau mutations linked to tauopathy.
Our results open up the possibility that tau mutations with WT-like
or slow aggregation kinetics may be pathogenic, in part, via their
ability to assemble into alternate tau aggregate structures. Disease-associated
tau mutations are a common element of current cell and animal model
systems used to study tau misfolding. Our work reveals that the choice
of mutation influences the overall misfolding process and may need
to be considered when designing future studies. Future characterization
comparing the ability of distinct tau aggregate structures to promote
seeding, propagation, and evade protein quality control factors will
dissect the fundamental features of tau aggregates responsible for
their induced pathobiology.
Methods
Cloning
of Tau Constructs
Mimics of disease-associated
tau mutations were generated in the 0N4R isoform of human tau by site-directed
mutagenesis. The parent vector is pET28 0N4R which encodes for expression
of WT 0N4R tau that is N-terminally fused to a sequence containing
a 6X-His-tag and a thrombin cleavage site. Q5 polymerase (NEB) was
used to amplify the pET28 0N4R plasmid
46
with desired mutagenesis primer pairs. Amplified templates were
treated with DpnI (Thermo Fisher) prior to transformation into DH5α
competent cells (Agilent). Successful mutation of isolated clones
was verified by Sanger sequencing, and clones were retransformed into
BL21-CodonPlus (DE3)-RP competent cells (Agilent) for protein expression.
Tau Purification
Large-scale protein purifications
of tau were carried out as previously described in Mok et al.
46
The large-scale purification protocol was modified
as followed for small-scale protein expression and purification. Cells
transformed with individual tau variants were grown to an O.D. 600
of 0.7 and then induced with IPTG (500 μM) for 3 h at 30 °C
to allow for protein expression. Pelleted cells arrayed in 96-well
plates were resuspended in resuspension buffer (1.5 mM KH
2
PO
4
, 8 mM Na
2
HPO
4
, 2.7 mM KCl, 2
mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF, pH 7.2) then lysed with lysozyme (0.3 mg/mL final)
in 3 successive freeze–thaw cycles. Lysates were treated with
12 U/mL of Benzonase for 30 min at 4 °C, boiled for 20 min, and
cleared by 2 rounds of centrifugation at 3214
g
for
15 min in 96-deep-well plates. Tau was purified from the supernatant
fraction by in-well chromatography using SP ImpRes/SP sepharose FF
resin (Cytiva) incubated in 96-well filter plates (Supor PES membrane
1.2 μM, Pall). Following 4 rounds of buffer exchange in wash
buffer (1.5 mM KH
2
PO
4
, 8 mM Na
2
HPO
4
, 2.7 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 50–150 mM NaCl, pH 7.2), tau
was eluted in elution buffer (1.5 mM KH
2
PO
4
,
8 mM Na
2
HPO
4
, 2.7 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 350 mM NaCl,
pH 7.2). Eluted tau protein was subject to buffer exchange in low-salt
buffer (1.5 mM KH
2
PO
4
, 8 mM Na
2
HPO
4
, 2.7 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, pH 7.2) and then aggregation assay
buffer (Dulbecco’s PBS, pH 7.4, 2 mM DTT) using 3K MWCO filter
plates (Pall). Buffer exchange was monitored by measuring the conductivity
of the protein sample with a conductivity probe calibrated to standard
solutions (INLAB 751–4MM, Mettler Toledo). Concentrations of
purified tau protein were determined using a reducing agent compatible
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher). Protein purity of
final preparations was assessed by coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE or MALDI-TOF
Mass spectrometry (Bruker Autoflex Speed MALDI-ToF, Bruker Daltonic).
Tau Kinetic Aggregation Assays
Aggregation kinetic
assays were performed and analyzed as previously described.
46
Briefly, reactions consisted of 10 μM
tau, 10 μM thioflavin T (Sigma), and 44 μg/mL heparin
sodium salt (Santa Cruz) in assay buffer. Aggregation reactions were
carried out at 37 °C with continuous shaking and monitored via
ThT fluorescence (excitation, 444 nm; emission, 485 nm; cutoff, 480
nm) in a Spectramax M5 microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Readings
were taken every 5 min for a minimum of 24 h. For analysis of kinetic
aggregation curves, individual baseline subtracted curves were fitted
to the Gompertz function
82
,
83
to extract kinetic
parameters (lag time, amyloid formation rate constant, amplitude).
A weighting of 1/
Y
was applied during the fitting
to accurately capture the lag time values.
Trypsin Digestion of Tau
Aggregates
Tau aggregates
directly sampled from
in vitro
aggregation assays
(15 μL) were treated with a final concentration of 0.03 mg/mL
mass-spectrometry-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher) in D-PBS. A time course
digestion using WT 0N4R tau as the substrate was performed for each
trypsin lot to calibrate assay conditions (total digestion time) across
experiments. Trypsin digest assays were incubated at 37 °C with
shaking at 800 rpm for the indicated times. Digestion reactions were
stopped by the addition of sample buffer (Fluorescent Master Mix,
ProteinSimple) and heating to 95 °C for 5 min. Tau fragments
were resolved using the Jess capillary gel electrophoresis system
(ProteinSimple) with the 2–40 kDa separation module. Reagents
and equipment were purchased from ProteinSimple unless stated otherwise.
Four microliters of each sample were loaded into the top-row wells
of plates preloaded with proprietary electrophoresis buffers designed
to separate proteins of 2–40 kDa. Subsequent rows of the plate
were filled with blocking buffer, primary and secondary antibody solutions,
and chemiluminescence reagents, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Detection of protein fragments was performed with the
total protein detection module or capillary Western blots using tau
antibodies.
84
Primary antibodies were tau
monoclonal antibodies including DA9 (aa 102–140, 1:10 dilution),
ET3 (aa 273–288, 1:10 dilution),
85
and 77G7 (BioLegend, aa 316–355, 1:100 dilution). DA9 and
ET3 antibodies were generously provided by Peter Davies. Secondary
antibodies were anti-mouse secondary HRP used according to manufacturer’s
directions (ProteinSimple). CompassSW software (ProteinSimple) was
used to generate chromatograms representing the lane profiles of separated
protease-resistant tau fragments detected by using the total protein
module (ProteinSimple) or tau antibodies. Chromatograms plot signal
intensity versus apparent MW, calibrated using protein standards included
in each capillary run.
Comparative Analysis of Trypsin-Resistant
Tau Fragment Profiles
To perform a cross-comparison of chromatograms
(fragment banding
patterns), a normalization step was first conducted to generate standardized
increment values with respect to kDa across all chromatograms. Namely,
from each profile, a 1-D function is interpolated, and values in the
range from 6 to 24 with a step of 0.1 are obtained, see
Figure S8
.
Subsequently, the distance among
the interpolated profiles is obtained by computing the correlation
distance. Given two 1-D arrays,
u
and
v
, the correlation distance between
u
and
v
is defined as
where
u̅
is the mean
value of the elements of
u
and
x
·
y
is the dot product of
x
and
y
. Once the distance among the profiles is
computed, they are grouped by hierarchical clustering using average
linkage (this is represented by means of a dendrogram)
86
and the distance among the samples is graphically
shown by using a heatmap. This process has been implemented in the
Python programming language and using the scikit-learn
87
and scipy
88
libraries.
Epitope Mapping of Trypsin-Resistant Tau Fragments
A script
was generated in the Python programming language to identify
potential tau sequences corresponding to individual trypsin-resistant
tau fragments based on their reactivity to assayed tau antibodies
and their apparent MW via capillary gel electrophoresis. The script
identifies potential tau fragment sequences generated by trypsin digestion
for a given MW. It then includes or excludes potential sequences based
on their reactivity with assayed tau antibodies. The program also
searches for potential tau dimer sequences if no matching sequence
is predicted from the initial analysis.
Dot Blots
0N4R
and 0N3R WT tau were expressed and purified
in alternating wells of a 96-well plate by small-scale tau expression
and purification. 100 pmol of purified tau sample from each well was
applied directly to a 0.1 μm nitrocellulose blotting membrane.
The membrane was probed with primary antibodies including tau mouse
ET3 (1:1000 dilution) and 6X-His Tag rabbit monoclonal antibody (Invitrogen,
1:3500 dilution). The secondary antibodies used were Cytiva CyDye
700 goat-anti-mouse and Cytiva CyDye 800 goat-anti-mouse (diluted
1:10 000). Following secondary antibody incubation, the blot
was visualized with a LICOR imager using the 700 and 800 nm channels.
MALDI-TOF
For MALDI analysis, 1 μL of each sample
was mixed with 1 μL of sinapinic acid (10 mg/mL in 50% acetonitrile/water
+ 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). 1 μL portion of the sample/matrix
solution was then spotted onto a stainless steel target plate and
allowed to air-dry. Mass spectra were obtained using a Bruker Autoflex
Speed MALDI-TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonic GmbH). All MS spectra
were recorded in positive linear mode, and external calibration was
performed by use of a standard protein mixture. Predicted
m
/
z
for full-length protein: 43801.1696
(with met oxidation = 43961.1188).
Modeling Tau Mutations
into Existing Cryo-EM Tau Fibril Structures
PDB structures
and their associated 2FoFc maps were modeled in
PyMOL (AD SF:
5O3T
, AD PHF:
6HRE
, CBD:
6TJO
, PSP:
7U0Z
, snake:
6QJH
, twister:
6QJM
, jagged:
6QJP
). Mutations were modeled onto structures using the mutagenesis function,
and all backbone-dependent rotamers were analyzed. Amino acid mutations
where all allowed side chain rotamers clash with the existing structure
were deemed as incompatible. Optimized mutant structures for
6HRE
were generated by
substituting amino acid mutations into the primary sequence. Five
cycles of PDB structures were generated using MODELLER with
6HRE
as a template. RMSD
was calculated with PyMOL’s alignment function in comparison
to
6HRE
. The
model with the lowest RMSD was selected for analysis.