Introduction
The mammalian brain is an extraordinarily
complex organ, composed
of billions of cells, such as neurons, microglia, and astrocytes,
with distinct functions and a unique proteome.
1
The immense complexity of protein networks in the brain is therefore
a significant challenge toward understanding function in health and
disease. Recent advances in proteomics offer a set of key technologies
that are being used to identify proteins, as well as their potential
post-translational modifications. Proteolytic processing of proteins
is considered an important regulatory event in cells, and disturbances
in proteolytic homeostasis can have severe consequences and result
in several neurological disease conditions.
2
,
3
As
an example, differential proteolysis of the amyloid precursor protein
can lead to production of the Alzheimer’s disease associated
Aβ peptide,
4
and processing of the
prion protein can prevent or enhance its aggregation, which can affect
pathogenesis of prion diseases (reviewed by Altmeppen et al.,
5
2012). Proteolytic processing of proteins is
thus considered a critical event in protein misfolding diseases, and
identifying the exact cleavage site on the target protein is an essential
step to understanding the role of proteases and their substrates in
the context of neurodegenerative diseases associated with this phenomenon.
The cellular prion protein (PrP
C
) is made in the secretory
pathway and is a 208-residue, cell surface glycoprotein,
6
anchored to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane
via a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, and is a highly
conserved protein in mammalian central nervous system (CNS).
7
Despite numerous proposed physiological functions,
no critical role has yet been defined for this protein, as PrP gene
knockout (KO) mice (also known as
Prnp
0/0
mice) manifest no major defects.
8
Misfolding
of PrP
C
into a transmissible β-sheet rich conformation
known as the “scrapie” prion protein (PrP
Sc
) causes a family of fatal neurodegenerative diseases known as transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases.
9
−
11
Proteolytic processing of PrP
C
has been shown to
impact
the protein’s vulnerability to pathological changes.
5
Therefore, a better understanding of PrP
C
fragmentation could provide key information toward enlightening
the complex mechanisms contributing to conformational changes of this
protein in the context of prion diseases. So far, a total of four
cleavage events have been described for PrP
C
; α,
β, and γ cleavage (named in order of discovery) and shedding.
Neither the precise location of the cleavage site nor the precise
proteases responsible for most of these are conclusive. The α-cleavage
is considered one of the most abundant fragmentation events targeting
PrP
C
; C1 fragment generated by this proteolytic event contributes
to approximately 50% of total PrP
C
in the CNS.
12
The cleavage event targets a region at the beginning
of the hydrophobic domain (HD) (within residues 109–112), with
a relevant cleavage observed between H110↓V111,
13
generating a soluble N-terminal fragment of
approximately 11 kDa (N1) and a membrane-bound C-terminal fragment
(C1) of ∼16 kDa. Members of the “a disintegrin and metalloprotease”
(ADAM) family of proteases are believed to be responsible for this
cleavage event.
14
However, some reports
have failed to identify direct connections between ADAM proteases
and C1 prevalence.
15
,
16
Thus, the identity of α-PrPase,
which has been shown to tolerate severe modifications within the PrP
C
sequence,
13
still needs to be
clarified. PrP shedding from a cleavage event close to the plasma
membrane generates a soluble proteolytic fragment, and the cleavage
site has been restricted to residues Q227↓R228 in mice (Q228↓R229
in humans), and
in vitro
and
in vivo
data suggest that ADAM10 is responsible for this event.
5
The most recently discovered cleavage event targeting
PrP
C
is γ-cleavage, targeting residues ∼170–200
within the C-terminus of the protein and generating a N3 fragment
(∼20 kDa) and a membrane bound C3 fragment (∼6–7
kDa). The γ-cleavage is affected by the presence of the glycans
and is proposed to be elevated in disease conditions.
10
Perhaps the most enigmatic aspect of PrP
C
fragmentation
is the β-cleavage, which happens within the octapeptide repeat
(OR) region. Early on, it was believed that β-cleavage of PrP
C
occurs through reactive oxygen species generated by the binding
of copper ions to the histidines residues within the OR region.
17
−
19
But since a fragment of the prion protein with similar molecular
weight and sequence is overtly generated during prion infection, a
series of pharmacological and genetic approaches have been used to
identify the protease in charge of this event in prion-infected cells.
Interestingly, it was found that the C2 fragment of PrP
Sc
was produced by calpains, a family of calcium-regulated and nonlysosomal
cysteine proteases.
20
However, another
study in SH-SY5Y cells suggested that C2-fragmentation does not depend
on calpains, and inhibition of calpain proteases did not affect this
process, while chemical induction of oxidative stress positively affected
C2 fragmentation.
19
Moreover, results from
this study indicated that the β-cleavage of PrP
C
under
physiological conditions occurs at the cell surface and the generated
C2 fragment is soluble and PK-sensitive. Later reports suggested heterogeneity
among different prion infected cells and tissues in C2-fragmentation
of PrP
Sc21
and hinted at a major decrease in C2-fragmentation
in lysosome-impaired cells, as well as cells treated with cathepsin
inhibitors. These observations led to the conclusion that the C2-fragmentation
of PrP
Sc
is indeed a proteolytic processing event, but
it relies on acidic hydrolases (such as the cathepsin family of proteases)
rather than calpains. It has been observed that β-cleavage products
are less abundant under physiological conditions compared to other
cleavage events, complicating their detection, a technical consideration
that may contribute to the divergent data on proteolytic pathways.
22
,
23
Accordingly, we investigated the proteolytic processing of PrP
C
, in part by taking advantage of a previously generated allele
with specific amino acid substitutions within the octapeptide repeat
(OR) region called PrPS3.
24
Figure
1
shows the structural features
of PrP
C
and the specific amino acid substitutions in the
S3 allele (red highlight).
Figure 1
Sequence of the prion protein and post translational
modifications.
(a) Structural features of the relevant sequences used for cleavage
site characterization. Sequence alignment for WT and S3 PrP. OR: octarepeat
region. HD: Hydrophobic domain. GD: globular domain. Residue numbering
is for mouse PrP
C
. (b) Structure of full length PrP
C
and post-translational processing into the proteolytic fragments.
(c) Immunoblot for the detection of PrP
C
and cleavage products
in the brain of transgenic mice (detection antibody SAF83). Increased
levels of C2 fragments were observed for the S3 transgenic mouse.
Herein, using liquid chromatography and tandem
mass spectrometry
(LC–MS/MS) we applied label free quantification methods to
define the proteome of wild-type PrP and S3 PrP
in vivo
. We then focused on PrP fragmentation and used a combination of
immunoprecipitation and
in vitro
labeling of the
N-termini; by these means, we identified fragments corresponding to
α- and β-cleavage of mouse PrP
C
and novel fragments
commencing at residues 74, 81, 92. In addition to these findings,
fragments commencing at residues 71, 79, and 87 from
ex vivo
samples corroborate recent data indicating endoproteolysis of PrP
C
in vitro
and
in vivo
by
S9B peptidase subfamily.
25
Results
Enzymatic Labeling
Approaches in N-Terminomics Enable Identification
of Numerous Cleavage Events in the Mouse Brain
As reported
before, transfection of a rabbit kidney cell line (RK13) with PrPS3
resulted in over production of a C2-like fragment,
24
and this observation was confirmed by
ex vivo
samples of brain tissue from mice expressing the S3 PrP allele (
Figure
1
c). To obtain a deeper
understanding of the protein fragmentation events
in vivo
, we applied an N-terminal labeling method to monitor the global
proteolytic activity in the brain (
Figure
2
). Whole mouse brains were first homogenized
and prepared for labeling. Briefly, we used subtiligase,
26
,
27
an engineered peptide ligase, to attach a biotin peptide ester to
the free N-termini found in the brain homogenates. Labeled proteins
were captured on streptavidin beads, trypsinized, and eluted from
the beads using the tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease. In the case
of successful ligation events, the eluted peptides feature a unique
mass-tag (aminobutyric acid or Abu at the N-termini) remnant from
the release, allowing unambiguous identification of the precise cleavage
site by LC–MS/MS.
28
To ensure successful
tagging and enrichment in this N-terminomic approach, the labeling
and capture steps were closely monitored by streptavidin blots (
Supporting Information Figure S1
).
Figure 2
Enzymatic labeling
for the identification of proteolytic events
in transgenic mouse brains. General workflow for the N-terminal labeling
in brain homogenate, protein cleavages that were labeled by subtiligase
with the biotinylated ester tag were enriched with streptavidin beads,
trypsin digested, and TEV protease was added for the release of labeled
peptides with a unique N-terminal mass tag (Abu), allowing for identification
by LC–MS/MS.
Single Brain vs Pooled
Brain Experiments
Considering
the lack of previously published subtiligase labeling applications
in mammalian tissue and due to the higher complexity of the material
when compared to cell culture lysates, initial optimization was required
to determine the appropriate amount of material needed for successful
identification of proteolytic events. Our initial experiments were
done on individual brain samples, where, upon homogenization and protein
quantification, each brain provided around 10 mg of total protein,
compared to hundreds of milligrams typically obtained from cell culture
lysates.
28
−
31
However, to minimize the background noise in comparative analysis
of different cohorts and evaluate the effect of a higher input material,
we performed the enzymatic-labeling experiments in pooled brain lysate
derived from three brains of the same
Prnp
allelic
type (∼25 mg of total protein input).
Supporting Information Files S1
and
S2
contain
the information on all peptides identified, labeled-peptides, unique
cleavages and substrates.
Overall, the data from the single
brain N-terminomic approaches allowed for identification of 337 and
418 labeled-peptides in WT and S3 brains, respectively. As expected,
a slight increase (around 30%) in the number of Abu-labeled peptides
was found in the combined brain approach (437 for the WT brain and
577 for the S3 brain;
Figure
3
a). By merging the data of all the cleavage events per allelic
type, a total of 467 unique cleavage events in 277 substrates were
detected for the WT brains, while in the case of the S3 brains, 614
cleavages in 379 substrates were observed. Despite some variability
between cohorts, 233 of the unique cleaved proteins identified were
found to be shared among the two groups (out of 277 for Tg WT and
379 for Tg S3). In addition, no major changes were observed in the
sequence specificity of the identified unique cleavage sites (
Figure
3
b). In WT brains,
there was a small increase in fragments with Gly and Met residues
at positions P1 and P1′, respectively. In S3 brains, there
was a slight increase in fragments with Arg at P1 and decrease of
Ala at P3 positions. No other noticeable differences were observed
in the fragment sequences between the cohorts with the two
Prnp
genotypes. Overall, our data indicate little perturbation
to the general proteolytic state between the Tg WT or Tg S3 brain.
Figure 3
Identification
of cleavage events in S3 and WT mouse brains. (a)
Statistics from different N-terminomic approaches for the identification
of cleavage sites. Results from single brain experiments (
n
= 5) and pooled brain approach were merged to show the
general proteolytic state of mouse brain samples. Individual identifications
for each genotype are shown within each bar. (b) IceLogo plot showing
the representation of residues from P4 through to P4′ for all
unique cleavage sites (lightning bolt, cleavage position; WT, left
panel; S3, right panel). (c) Correlation between cleaved proteins
in mouse brain from N-terminomics data and LFQ identifications, and
number of significant proteins in the detected cleavage products.
Mass Spectrometry Analysis Confirms Brain
Proteome Similarities
A global proteome comparison was performed
to monitor if the similarities
found in proteolysis reflect little perturbation to the entire brain
proteome by introducing the different PrP gene (
Prnp
) alleles. A PrP KO (
Prnp
0/0
) mouse was
included in this comparison as an extra control. Homogenized mouse
brain samples were resolved on a SDS–PAGE gel and subjected
to in-gel digestion, and the generated peptides were analyzed by LC–MS/MS.
Our label-free quantification (LFQ) approach allows the identification
of more than 3700 proteins in each genotypic group, and the relative
abundance of over 3500 of these proteins was quantified (3614 for
KO, 3555 for WT, and 3539 for S3) with an average of 9 peptides per
protein identified. Several proteins previously described as interactors
of PrP
C
or involved in pathways relevant to its postulated
functions were detected by the LFQ approach.
32
,
33
Protein abundance correlation between KO, WT, and S3 groups is presented
in
Supporting Information Figure S3
, and
a summary of all changes is included in the
Supporting Information File S2
. As expected, S3 and WT proteomes were
found to be very similar. Only a small percentage (>2.5%) of the
proteome
showed significant differences among groups, and a smaller fraction
(∼1%), 59 proteins, were found significantly changed in the
S3/WT comparison by the post hoc test.
Correlation between Proteomics,
N-Terminomics, and Protease
Prediction
To determine if the cleavage events identified
have an impact on the protein level of each substrate, we compared
the cleaved proteins identified using N-terminomics and the protein
levels from the global proteomics data (
Figure
3
c). Around 70% of the unique proteolytic
substrates were detected in the LFQ data (198/277 for WT and 256/379
for S3 substrates). For the most part, the protein levels of these
substrates did not significantly change for the S3/WT comparison.
Only a small percentage (∼2%) of these cleavages showed statistically
significant change at the protein level (4 of the WT cleaved proteins
and 3 of the S3 cleaved proteins). This suggests that both phenotypes
have similar proteolytic backgrounds.
Despite the over-representation
of abundant proteolytic fragments, the information about the multiple
cleavage events from N-terminomics and the proteomic characterization
of the brain can be further exploited to obtain a broad picture of
the general proteolytic state of brain tissue. By extracting the residue
preferences around the cleavage site from all cleavage events in the
N-terminomic experiments and comparing them with the specificity reported
for mouse peptidases (MEROPS database), we were able to predict the
most active proteases in the mouse brain. A list of the top 25 predicted
active proteases in each sample is presented in
Supporting Information Table S1
, and the full prediction list
can be found in
Supporting Information File S4
. Some of the previously reported candidate proteases targeting PrP
C
(ADAM17, ADAM8, and ADAM9 for the α-cleavage,
14
cathepsins
21
and
ADAM9
15
for the β-cleavage, and several
MMPs associated with the γ-cleavage
34
) were among the highly represented proteases in our data set.
The initial prediction was further refined by correlating the lists
with the proteases observed by global proteomics to reflect the proteases
involved in brain proteolysis. In fact, ADAM10, which has been validated
by genetic means to cleave PrP
C
adjacent to the GPI anchor
35
and was identified to be responsible for α-processing
of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP),
36
was ranked at position 15 with this cross comparison. A
full list of the correlation between predicted proteases and global
proteomics can be found in
Supporting Information File S4
. Interestingly, the predictions using the background
proteolytic activity in both WT PrP
C
and PrPS3 samples
ranked aminopeptidases (APAs) among the proteases with overrepresented
cleavage events in our data sets. These include aminopeptidase P3,
acylaminoacyl-peptidase, and a few members of the dipeptidases family
of APA. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first
application of N-terminomics to study proteolytic processing events
in tissue such as mouse brain and the results generated represent
the largest data set of cleavage events in the mouse brain proteome.
However, despite these analysis and optimization steps, we could not
detect cleaved fragments of PrP
C
using subtiligase N-terminomics,
possibly due to the nature and abundance of the generated fragments
(e.g., hydrophobicity, length, and charge, for example).
N-Terminal
Labeling of PrP Fragments Reveals a High Level of
Complexity in the Cleavage Events
To facilitate the characterization
of PrP
C
fragmentation events, we added a pre-enrichment
step prior to N-terminal labeling (
Figure
4
a). We conducted trial immunoprecipitations
(IPs) of both WT and S3 PrP samples using several antibodies (
Figure
4
b), and based on
the yield and target epitope location, we decided to settle upon antibody
38C12 (detecting residues 151–162 of mouse PrP). The enrichment
reduced sample complexity by increasing the amount of PrP fragments
in the sample. Eluted samples, enriched for PrP, were enzymatically
labeled using subtiligase as previously described. Data analysis was
initially done using the mouse proteome to confirm PrP enrichment
in the immunoprecipitated samples. Once the successful identification
of the protein of interest was determined, we performed restricted
searches against the WT PrP
C
and PrPS3 sequences directly
to characterize the cleavage events in this protein. Manual inspection
of each peptide assignment was performed with the criteria for selection
described in the
Methods
section.
Supporting Information File S5
includes a summary
of all the identifications for global proteome and restricted searches.
While no labeled peptides were observed in the WT brain, three labeled
peptides were identified in one of the replicates of the S3 brain.
The first labeled peptide at positions 79 (PHGP↓S
79
FGQ) was close to the β-cleavage region, while peptides starting
at residue 110 (TNLK↓H
110
VAG) and 112 (LKHV↓A
112
GAA) were observed for the α-cleavage region. Although
suggestive of physiological processing, the paucity of cleavage events
identified via the ligation method indicated the need for an alternative
strategy to further validate these findings.
Figure 4
Chemical labeling of
immunoprecipitated PrP. (a) General workflow
of the automated immunoprecipitation of PrP and N-terminal labeling
of pull down PrP from mouse brain homogenates. The eluted samples
were enzymatically labeled or chemically modified. (b) Detection of
full-length PrP and fragments after automated immunoprecipitation.
Four different antibodies were used for pulldown (D1515, B1.1, 38C12,
and N5 antibodies). As the epitopes recognized by 38C12 were most
convenient for working with mouse prion protein, we continued with
this antibody for the scale-up (detection antibody SAF83). Summary
of acetylated peptides identified around the α-cleavage (c)
and the β-cleavage (d). The color scheme shows the confidence
level for each identification. Cleavage at position 79 in the S3 sequences
and 112 in WT sequence (underlined) was found by enzymatic and chemical
labeling.
Chemical Labeling of PrP N-Termini Fragments
To complement
the results of enzymatic labeling, we decided to use a chemical labeling
strategy to confirm and expand the identification of PrP fragments
from mouse brain (
Figure
4
a). Briefly, we immunoprecipitated PrP from individual WT
and S3 mice and confirmed the presence of proteolytic fragments using
WB and SDS–PAGE gel (
Supporting Information Figure S3
). The N-termini of the proteolytic fragments were
acetylated directly in the gel, followed by an in-gel trypsinization.
37
This approach enabled the identification of
several acetylated peptides in the vicinity of the previously reported
α- and β-cleavage regions of PrP. The distribution of
these labeled peptides around the α-cleavage site and the octarepeat
region is summarized in
Figure
4
c,d.
Supporting Information Figure S6
contains the MS/MS data for every labeled fragment identified, and
a summary of the labeling approaches using immunoprecipitated material
is included in
Supporting Information File S5
. Most cleavage events identified with high confidence by the restricted
searches were also observed in the searches against the entire mouse
proteome. We noted that the cleavage products in S3 share virtually
identical protease specificity P4′–P1′ (PHGP↓G/S)
for peptides starting at positions 71, 79 and 87, a finding that is
compatible with the known sequence repetitions mapped to the octapeptide
repeat region (
Figure
1
). It is worth noting that the cleavage product identified by the
enzymatic labeling approach (position 79) was also detected by the
chemical labeling strategy. For WT PrP
C
, the position of
the cleavage products slightly differed from the PrPS3. With the exception
of position 74, most cleavages identified were C-terminal to residue
86, although with a raggedness of assigned N-termini (see
Discussion
). The sequence specificity for the peptides
observed for WT PrP shows cleavage after either a Gly or a Gln residue.
The presence of Gly at P1 is consistent with the slight overrepresentation
of Gly residues in the IceLogo for WT brains identified in subtiligase
N-terminomics for the whole mouse brains (
Figure
3
c).
To get some insight about the stability
of the products generated
in vivo
surrounding the
α- and β-cleavages, we extracted the intensity of all
the acetylated peptides identified by mass spectrometry (
Supporting Information Figure S4
). The graphs
show normalized average intensities for the fragments detected. The
differences in the intensities for each acetylated peptide could indicate
variable stability for each fragment within the population, although
we recognize that ion counts are intrinsic properties of each peptide.
The most abundant cleavages surrounding the α-cleavage featured
a Val or Ala at the N-termini (for both WT and S3 brains), while peptides
close to the β-cleavage showed mostly fragmentations starting
with Gly in the WT brain and Gly or Pro for the S3 brain. Interestingly,
the well-known positions of the α-cleavage (at consecutive residues
H111 and V112 in humans, which are equivalent to residues 110 and
111 in mice) do not represent the most abundant fragments
in vivo
.
23
,
38
Discussion
Subtiligase-Based
N-Terminomics To Probe the Mouse Brain Proteolytic
State
Protein homeostasis is a complex network that must
be maintained to allow proper protein synthesis and degradation. The
same components that play crucial roles in proteostasis are usually
involved in response to stress and disease.
39
Changes in the levels of specific regulators give us some hints
on the mechanisms triggered in response to specific condition. Proteomic
studies allow us to simultaneously monitor changes in the entire proteome
of an organism under stress. An extra layer of complexity within the
proteome of an organism is encoded by the different post-translational
modifications (PTMs) that give rise to multiple proteoforms with distinctive
properties within the cell. Proteolysis is an important irreversible
PTM involved in protein maturation, protein degradation, and regulation
of enzymes’ activity. Proteases are the key players involved
in proteolysis; 553 proteases in humans and 628 proteases in the mouse
degradome are the main regulators of important processes such as cell
death, differentiation, as well as diseases such as neurodegeneration.
40
The application of N-terminomics methodologies
has focused mostly on the discovery of protease substrates using cell
lines as the starting material. N-terminomic approaches have been
employed in Jurkat cells lysates for substrate identification of several
caspases,
31
,
41
mouse embryonic fibroblasts for MMP substrates,
42
−
44
and HEK293T for substrates of the DPP family.
45
Only a few studies have used N-terminal labeling strategies
to characterize proteolysis in samples of higher complexity, such
as blood (enzymatic labeling),
46
pancreatic
tumors (chemical labeling),
47
and colon
biopsies (chemical labeling).
48
Subtiligase
labeling, despite the limitation of high amounts of starting material
(in the mg range),
49
has allowed the generation
of valid information about proteolytic events in important biological
processes such as viral infections (Zika virus
50
and SARS-CoV-2
51
) or cleavage
event at the cell surface.
52
In our study,
we explored the applicability of subtiligase-based N-terminomics for
the first time in brain samples. The enzymatic labeling of the cleavage
products allowed us to identify hundreds of cleavage events in the
individual brain samples. An alternative approach, where multiple
brains were combined, was also evaluated to improve the number of
cleavage products obtained, to increase the capture of low abundance
fragments, and to reduce the number of biological replicates needed
to obtain good coverage. Combining multiple brains showed good substrate
coverage but loss of the information that individual biological replicates
could provide about the proteolytic stage of individual brains. For
future studies, this strategy should be considered for an initial
exploration point. Once some substrates of interest are identified,
a few replicates with individual brains could be considered to evaluate
the biological variability of the cleavages of interest.
Global Brain
Proteome
The proteome coverage reported
here is comparable to previous studies using similar instrumentation
to characterize whole brain proteomes using label-free approaches.
53
An improvement in the average number of peptides
per identification was obtained with our in-gel fractionation in comparison
with the previous report using in-solution digestion (9 vs 6 peptides
per protein on average, respectively). Label-free quantification represents
a simple and straightforward option for proteomic comparisons that
does not require specific instrumentation. However, the LFQ methods
used here are prone to higher variance, lower sensitivity when compared
to chemical tagging such as tandem mass tags (TMTs).
54
It is worth noting that evaluation of the proteomic state
of the mouse brain using TMT gives a deeper proteome coverage (∼6800
proteins).
55
Despite that, the LFQ approach
in our study allowed quantification of around 3700 proteins in the
brains of transgenic
Prnp S3
vs
Prnp WT
mice and revealed very similar profiles. For the comparison of PrP
KO vs WT, the significant changes observed might be related to the
biological functions of PrP
C
, as this protein has been
shown to be involved in neuronal health or cell response to stress.
Previous proteomic approaches on the function of PrP
C
suggested
that the loss of prion protein leads to age-dependent behavioral abnormalities
in mice accompanied by changes in cytoskeletal organization at cellular
level.
56
Our global proteome analysis was
sensitive enough to detect the few significant differences between
the two conditions.
The amino acid substitutions in PrPS3 were
designed to mimic the specific conformation of WT PrP
C
interacting
with one copper ion in the OR region (i.e., a 1:1 stoichiometry of
PrP:Cu
2+
) by strategic positioning of extra proline residues
in the OR,
57
to reduce conformational flexibility.
As a secondary effect, these proline residues can also cause more
interactions with proline isomerases and partially modify the PrPS3
protein interactome. Irrespective of the amino acid substitutions
in PrPS3 versus WT PrP
C
, these two show no notable differences
in glycosylation or subcellular patterns in RK13 cells.
24
However, PrPS3 shows notably increased fragmentation
in some cell lines and in the adult mouse brain. Notably, an abundant
product from PrPS3 resembles the C2 fragment generated by β-cleavage
of WT PrP
C
and a PrP fragment generated in prion infected
cells. Whether the minor changes in proteome relate to the mechanisms
triggered by the higher levels of C2 fragment or intrinsic properties
of the full-length mutant PrP or insertion site effects associated
with the WT and S3
Prnp
transgene insertion site
version itself remains to be established.
As noted, PrPS3 has
additional proline residues in the OR region,
suggesting potential vulnerability to post-proline cleaving proteases;
here an important class of candidate proteases corresponds to the
S9B superfamily of type II membrane proteins.
58
In our data set, the levels of the S9B protease family member DPP6
were significantly altered when PrP
C
was knocked out. DPP6,
a catalytically dead S9B protein, has been described as an interactor
of PrP
C
.
59
,
60
Additionally, DPP2 was ranked
among the top proteases predicted from the cleavage site information
generated by subtiligase-based N-terminomics. Intriguingly, overexpression
and
in vitro
cleavage assays with some members of
the S9B protease family, namely, DPP4 and fibroblast activation protein
(but not DPP6 or the cytoplasmically expressed S9B family members
DPP8 and DPP9), proved adept at β-cleavage of S3 PrP, and WT
PrP
C
to a lesser extent, cleaving directly at multiple
sites within the sequence.
25
Noting that
DPP4 is also implicated in generating N-terminally truncated pathogenic
forms of Alzheimer’s disease Aβ peptide,
61
a deeper exploration of the S9B proteases (which may have
complex patterns of regulation exhibiting changes in localization
independent of catalytic activity
62
) may
be warranted.
The correlation between proteomics and N-terminomics
data sets
shows that most of the substrates of proteolysis do not have a notable
impact on the total level of the corresponding protein at the global
proteome level. Previous studies have found that some of the cleavage
events from N-terminomics correspond to proteolytic processing during
protein maturation, proenzyme activation, signal peptide removal.
47
,
48
In those cases, the neo-N-termini generated is stable, and no significant
alterations of overall protein abundance is observed. Only the nonstable
cleavage products that undergo degradation will cause a reduction
on the levels of that protein.
Protein-Based Ligation
vs Chemical Labeling To Probe the Brain’s
Proteolytic Repertoire
Identification of the exact cleavage
site on a target protein is a key step in the process of understanding
the role of proteolytic events in complex biological systems and disease
conditions. When performing subtiligase-mediated labeling of immunoprecipitated
PrP, a few peptides around the regions of interest were identified
with low and medium confidence. Although it is possible that the low
confidence is caused by inefficient labeling of the N-termini, some
other potential scenarios that could cause poor identification include:
(i) the low levels of these fragmentation events in the brain under
physiological conditions, (ii) the fragment gives less optimal peptides
for detection after digestion (e.g., trypsinization efficiency or
formation of peptides that are too small, too large, or not charged),
and (iii) unfavorable protein sequence at the N-termini of the generated
fragments which could affect subtiligase enzyme labeling efficiency;
this specific case can be observed in the PrPS3 brains due to the
presence of proline residues, which could decrease subtiligase labeling
efficiency.
27
In addition, while a panel
of protease inhibitors was used to prevent degradation during the
sample preparation, we cannot rule out that some of the low abundant
cleavages identified originated from the remaining protease activity
in the lysates.
The chemical modification alternative managed
to identify several labeled peptides around the region where PrP
C
proteolytic processing takes place. This is possibly due
to a higher labeling efficiency, promiscuous labeling of the N-termini,
and reduced sample loss (less steps required) in comparison with the
enzymatic labeling. Accordingly, we have provided a list of cleavage
site candidates as well as a proposed model to explain the complex
proteolytic processing events corresponding to β-cleavage, which
is considered a disease-relevant fragmentation. The presence of multiple
acetylated peptides around the OR might indicate N-terminal trimming
of the original fragments postcleavage by aminopeptidases, which also
agrees with our results wherein we see the overrepresentation of this
group of proteases in our protease predictions obtained from the brain
N-terminomics. Indeed, this phenomenon has been reported for other
proteins in complex sample matrices, such as human serum
46
,
63
,
64
as well as Aβ peptide in
brain samples.
61
Indeed, concerted action
of APA and DPP4 has been speculated to play a role in Alzheimer disease
pathogenesis.
65
From a technical
standpoint, the results shown here could explain
why studying
in vivo
fragmentation can be challenging.
The inferred N-terminal trimming (likely generated by exoproteolytic
action of proteases, and artifacts of pre- or postbrain extraction
process) would generate a population of ragged fragments rather than
a clean, discrete N-terminus corresponding to a single molecule; this
allegedly complicates downstream analysis of fragments by alternative
approaches such as Edman degradation, a technique that requires material
with high purity. Additionally, the amount of protein that is fragmented
in natural, physiological conditions is often low to start with (i.e.,
versus levels of full-length holoprotein), and by further digesting
the N-termini, the concentration of each molecule in the sample would
be further reduced. While techniques with high sensitivity and selectivity
(e.g., mass spectrometry) can identify such fragments, pre-enrichment
steps and an understanding of exoproteases in the extracellular environment
may be needed to attain a full picture of the fragment repertoire.
The difference in abundance for the “ragged” products
of proteolysis might indicate that the processive cleavage favors
some stable residues at the N-termini. This is clearly observed in
both cleavage sites reported, where the most abundant fragments start
with stable residues (V or G) that are not targeted for N-termini
dependent ubiquitin–proteasomal degradation, according to the
N-end rule pathway.
66
Here we present a
simplified model of the mechanism for β-fragmentation that takes
into account the role of aminopeptidases and processive cleavage by
the β-PrPase to generate a ragged C2 fragment (
Figure
5
).
Figure 5
Proposed model for the
fragmentation at the β position. During
oxidative stress or prion disease, PrP
C
is recognized by
the β-PrPase(s) and cleaved at one or multiple sites with similar
sequence specificity and with the cleavage even generating N2 and
C2 fragments. Upon fragmentation, the C2 fragments can be further
digested at the N-termini by aminopeptidases, generating a population
with ragged-end C2 fragments.
Overall, this work sets an example of applying
a combination of
N-terminal labeling techniques as a novel MS-based approach to study
fragmentation events and provides insights on necessary steps to adjust
this technique for examining proteolytic processing events
in vivo
in a complex sample such as the brain or immunoprecipitated
samples with reduced complexity. Our study shows that the complementarity
of enzymatic and chemical labeling methods could provide the tools
needed to distinguish relevant proteolytic events, which could be
easily extrapolated to other conditions where proteolysis plays a
major role, such as cell death or other neurodegenerative diseases.
Methods
Animals
Transgenic
line 14 expressing the S3.F88W allele
of PrP
C
was published previously,
24
with line 76 used here expressing similar steady-state levels of
PrP
C
as S3.F88W and being generated by the same methods.
These mice as well as
Zrch1
PrP null mice
67
were maintained on an FVB genetic background.
All the mice were housed in groups of up to five animals and maintained
in ventilated racks (Tecniplast, Green Line), and the cages were cleaned
and maintained on a daily basis. The animals were fed irradiated chow
(LabDiets, 5053) and were under a 12 h light/dark cycle with food
and demineralized water
ad libitum
. The brain tissue
was collected from mice 3–4 months old shortly after cerebral
dislocation; each brain was dissected into two hemispheres by cutting
along the middle line, flash frozen with dry ice, and then stored
at −80 °C. All the care and use of animals followed the
Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) guidelines, and the protocols
were approved by the animal care use committee for Health Sciences
Laboratory Animal Services at the University of Alberta (protocol
number AUP00000357).
Tissue Homogenization
For whole
proteome analysis,
three individual brains from KO, WT, and S3 mice were homogenized
10% w/v in a urea-based lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5,
1% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM AEBSF, 1 mM PMSF, and 4 mM IAM). Total protein
concentration of each sample was determined by the BCA assay. For
N-terminomics, mild lysis conditions compatible with enzymatic labeling
were employed. Accordingly, mouse brains expressing the PrPKO, WT
PrP
C
, or PrPS3 (
n
= 5) were homogenized
to generate 10% w/v brain homogenates in lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES,
pH 8.5, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitors, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM AEBSF, 1
mM PMSF, 4 mM IAM) using dounce homogenizers. A round of sonication
(30% amp, 2 s on/2 s off, 2 min) was applied to each sample, and lysates
were incubated in the dark on ice for 15 min.
In-Gel Digestion for Shotgun
Proteomic Comparisons
Whole proteome comparison of the mouse
strains was performed by in-gel
digestion of all of the brain homogenates followed by liquid chromatography
with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). A label-free quantification
approach was applied on brains containing PrPKO, WT PrP
C
, and PrPS3 brains.
For the in-gel digestion, 100 μg
of total protein per sample was loaded into a precast gel (4–20%),
and the resulting gel was stained with Coomassie blue silver. Gel
bands were excised and cut into smaller pieces (∼1 mm) and
transferred to a round-bottom 96-well plate; a total of six fractions
per lane were generated. Gel pieces were destained twice with 100
mM NH
4
HCO
3
containing 50% ACN at 37 °C
for 10 min. Reduction was performed by incubation with 10 mM BME for
30 min at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 50 mM IAM in the
same conditions. Gel fragments were washed once with 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
and dehydrated with 100% ACN. In-digestion
was performed by swelling the dry gel with 0.5 μg of trypsin
in 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
and overnight incubation at
RT. Next morning, supernatant was recovered, and serial extractions
were done by incubating the gel fragments with extraction buffer 1
(MS H
2
O with 2% (v/v) ACN and 1% (v/v) formic acid), and
extraction buffer 2 (50% extraction buffer 1 and 50% (v/v) ACN) for
1 h at 37 °C. Supernatants were combined, dried down in a speed
vac, and stored at −20 °C until MS analysis.
Subtiligase-Based
Labeling and Enrichment
Tissue homogenates
were heated to 95 °C for 5 min, and lysates were clarified by
centrifugation (10 000
g
for 10 min). Supernatant
was recovered and protein concentrations were determined using a BCA
kit (Thermo Fisher). Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed by
addition of 5 mM TCEP and samples were heated at 95 C for 15 min.
After cooling down the sample, alkylation was done for 1h in the dark
with 10 mM IAM. After incubation, excess of IAM was quenched with
25 mM DTT. 2.5% Triton X-100 was added into each sample to reduce
SDS interference. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 10 000
g
for 10 min. Supernatant was recovered, and pH was adjusted
to 8.5 with 1 M bicine, pH 9.2.
N-terminal labeling of cleaved
proteins was performed by addition of 1 μM stabiligase, 1 μM
subtiligase M222A, and 1 mM TEVest6 for 2 h. The plasmids were a gift
from Drs. Amy Weeks and Jim Wells.
27
Successful
labeling was monitored by streptavidin blots. Labeled protein fragments
were precipitated using acetonitrile, and the pellet was recovered
in 8 M Gdn-HCl and precipitated again in ethanol. Proteins were recovered
in 2 M Gdn-HCl and biotinylated N-terminal proteins were then captured
with NeutrAvidin agarose beads (ThermoFisher) for 24 h. The beads
were washed using 4 M Gdn-HCl, PBS and trypsin buffer (100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
) and trypsinized overnight at room temperature.
Internal peptides were removed by washing with 4 M Gdn and TEV buffer
(100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
, 2 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA). Peptides
were released from the beads using TEV protease. The protease was
precipitated using 2.5% TFA, and the labeled peptides were desalted
using C18 Ziptips (Thermo).
PrP Immunoprecipitation and N-Terminal Labeling
Brains
from all mice strains (KO, WT, S3) were homogenized in immunoprecipitation
buffer that allows good enrichment of PrP
C
,
68
with some modifications, 150 mM Tris (pH 8.3),
150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate supplemented with
protease inhibitors, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM AEBSF, 1 mM PMSF, 4 mM IAM. Samples
were sonicated (30% amp, 2 s on/2 s off for 2 min), clarified by centrifugation
10 000
g
for 15 min, supernatant was recovered,
and total protein was quantified using the BCA kit. For immunoprecipitation
of PrP, multiple antibodies were tested: D1515, B1.1, and 38C12 antibodies
and N5. These house-made antibodies that recognize the N-terminal
region of PrP
C
, were raised against bovine (173–180
IgG2b), mouse, CWD, and synthetic prion peptides, respectively. These
antibodies were kindly provided by Dr. Holger Wille, University of
Alberta.
Automated immunoprecipitation was performed using a
KingFisher Duo Prime purification system following the manufacturer’s
protocol (Publication No. MAN0016198; Thermo Scientific) with some
modifications on the BindIt software (v4.0.0). All reagents were loaded
into a 96 deep-well plate. In brief, 10 μg of each antibody
in 200 μL of PBS-T (phosphate buffered saline with 0.02% Tween
20) were bound to 25 μL of Dynabeads protein G beads (Invitrogen;
10003D) for 10 min, and subsequently washed with 200 μL of PBS-T.
The beads–antibody complex was then incubated with 500 μL
of brain lysates containing 2 mg of total protein for 1 h, and washed
twice with 500 μL of PBS. The bound proteins were eluted using
50 μL of 100 mM glycine at pH = 2.0 for enzymatic labeling or
50 μL for enzymatic labeling or 50 μL of 4× Laemmli
buffer (Bio-Rad) without reducing agents and heated to 70 °C
for 10 min for chemical labeling. The eluants were collected from
the plate and run on an SDS–PAGE gel. IP was repeated in triplicate
for antibody 38C12.
Enzymatic labeling of pulled down material
was performed as mentioned
above (
n
= 2). For chemical labeling, eluted samples
from individual brains (
n
= 3) were loaded into a
precast gel (4–20%, Biorad) and stained with Coomassie blue
silver. In-gel acetylation was performed as previously described by
Hersman et al. (2012)
37
with modifications.
Gel bands were excised and cut into smaller pieces (∼1 mm)
and transferred to a round-bottom 96 well plate. Gel pieces were destained
with 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
containing 50% ACN at 37
°C. Destained bands were dried with 100% ACN and recovered in
100 μL of acetic acid and 20 μL of acetic anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich).
Samples were incubated for 5 h at room temperature. Treated samples
were rinsed with deionized water, dried with ACN to remove the excess
derivatizing reagents, washed again with deionized water, and titrated
with 200 mM NH
4
HCO
3
to a pH of 8. Extra washes
were done to remove excess salts. Samples were incubated with ACN
until fully dried, and in-digestion was performed by addition of 0.5
μg of trypsin per well and overnight incubation at 37 °C.
Peptide extraction was performed as described for shotgun proteomics.
Immunoblotting
To confirm differential expression of
C2 fragment (relative to total protein) in WT PrP
C
and
PrPS3, brain homogenates were treated with PNGase F as previously
described.
24
For the immunoprecipitated
samples, eluted fractions were loaded onto a 12% SDS–PAGE gel.
After separation, proteins were transferred onto 0.45 μm nitrocellulose
membranes (BioRad) and blocked in 2.5% fish skin gelatin in TBS at
RT for 1 h. For the PrP Western blots, membranes were incubated with
primary antibody (SAF83) diluted (1:5000) in 2.5% fish skin gelatin
in TBST at 4 °C overnight. The membrane was washed 3× with
TBST for 10 min and incubated with secondary antibody (polyclonal
anti-mouse HRP) diluted in 2.5% fish skin gelatin in TBST at RT for
1 h. The membrane was washed again three times with TBST for 10 min
before viewing on the LI-COR Odyssey Fc imaging system.
For
streptavidin blots, prelabeling and postlabeling samples were loaded
on the gel, separated, and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes,
and membranes were blocked the same way. For detection, membranes
were incubated with streptavidin-680 (Licor) diluted (1:10 000)
in 2.5% fish skin gelatin for 30 min, and membranes were washed 3×
with TBST for 5 min before scanning on the imaging system. To monitor
capture efficiency, precapture and postcapture samples were diluted
1:5, 1:10, and 1:20 with ddH
2
O. A small aliquot (2 μL)
was directly loaded into nitrocellulose membranes, and samples were
dried for 15 min at room temperature. Blocking, washes, and scanning
were performed as described for regular streptavidin blots.
Mass Spectrometry
For shotgun proteomics and N-terminomics
samples, peptides were recovered in ddH
2
O with 3.9% (v/v)
ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Each fraction was separated using
nanoflow-HPLC (Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 System) coupled to
an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Reverse phase separation of the peptides was done on
a trap column (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm, Acclaim
PepMap 100 nanoViper C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an analytical
column (2 μm, 100 Å, 50 μm × 15 cm, PepMap RSLC
C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 60 min linear gradient from 3.9%
to 36.8% ACN in 0.1% formic acid was programmed for each of the shotgun
fractions. For all of the N-terminomics samples, a 120 min linear
gradient was used for the separation of the peptides. The samples
from in-gel acetylation were separated with the same 60 min gradient
using the nanoflow-HPLC with the 25 cm Aurora series columns and
emitter coupled to the same mass spectrometer.
Bioinformatic Analysis
and MS Data Search
For the shotgun
proteomics experiments, label free quantitation of all the proteins
was performed in the software ProteinDiscoverer (v2.4) using the LFQ
processing workflow and the LFQ consensus workflow against the Uniprot
mouse proteome data (2021, 55 336 sequences) with the PrPS3
sequence added. A global normalization approach was applied as an
alternative to compensate for variabilities and a global minimum was
imputed to zero-fill the missing values. The search was performed
with a maximum false discovery rate of 1% for peptides. Trypsin was
selected as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 3 missed tryptic
cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm with a fragment
mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was added as fixed
modification, and deamidation at N/Q and M oxidation were set as variable
modifications. Only proteins identified with two or more peptides
and observed in two or three replicates were considered for comparison
among groups. Statistically significant differences were determined
by a one-way ANOVA at 1% significance, followed by a post hoc test
(Fisher’s LSD). Lists of significantly increased and decreased
proteins (
p
-value of <0.01 and >2-fold change)
were generated for the comparisons WT vs KO, S3 vs KO, and S3 vs WT.
The log
2
(ratio) of each comparison was graphed on each
side of a triangle to generate a triplot that represents all pairwise
comparisons. Each dot in the graph represents a protein fold change
and its correlation among all comparisons. The location of a dot on
the graph indicates the association of that protein with the specific
sample. Identifications closer to the vertex correspond to proteins
with higher association with that genotype, while identifications
closer to the center of the triangle indicate similar levels of that
protein in all comparisons. Proteins highlighted (purple and pink)
correspond to proteins with significant differences from the one-way
ANOVA test, while those in pink were found to be significant for the
S3 vs WT comparison.
N-terminomics data were analyzed using
ProteinProspector (v5.22.1) against the Uniprot mouse proteome database
(2017, 556 007 sequences) with the PrPS3 sequence added. The
searches were performed with a maximum false discovery rate of 1%
for peptides. Search parameters were the same as the LFQ, but trypsin
was set as the digestion enzyme with relaxed specificity at the N-termini
and an extra variable modification was added, aminobutyric acid (Abu)
at the N-termini of the peptide.
The labeling experiments with
immunoprecipitated material were
initially searched against the Mmouse database mentioned above to
confirm successful enrichment of PrP. Subsequent searches for the
identification of labeled cleavage products were conducted in a similar
way against the WT and S3 sequences of PrP, using either the Abu-
or acetyl-variable modification at the N-termini. The MSMS spectrum
of the labeled peptides identified was manually inspected, and the
intensity and expectation values for each peptide were extracted.
The confidence level of the peptides identified takes into account
the expectation value and the reproducibility peptide identification
per replicate. Peptides were classified as high confidence (
e
-value of <1.00 × 10
–5
), medium
confidence (
e
-value between 1.00 × 10
–5
and 3.00 × 10
–3
), and low confidence (
e
-value of >3.00 × 10
–3
). If a
peptide
was identified in two or more replicates the confidence of the identification
was increased.
Protease Prediction
To identify
the peptidase contribution
to the proteolytic state in the brain, we extracted the amino acid
distribution from P4 to P4′ positions around the cleavage sites
for all of the enzymatic-labeling experiments in both WT and S3 brains.
The peptidase specificity was manually extracted for every peptidase
with reported cleavage pattern under the
Mus musculus
entry in the organism section of the MEROPS database (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/merops/index.shtml
). The residue preference at each position from our data was correlated
with the specificity reported for mouse peptidases in the MEROPS database.
A reliability score was calculated by counting the matches between
N-terminomics data and peptidase specificity at every position and
dividing the total of the matches at all positions by the number of
comparisons (substrates considered) times the number of residues considered
for every peptidase and multiplying by 100. Peptidase data were sorted
by reliability score, and top predictions are reported.
48
,
69
,
70