Current lipidomics studies aim
to profile hundreds of lipid species from biological specimens to
investigate lipid homeostasis.
1
Among other
techniques, standard flow liquid chromatography (250–600 μL/mL)
interfaced with mass spectrometry (MS) remains dominant in pursuing
lipidomics analyses.
2
,
3
Research laboratories are increasingly
moving toward high-throughput 3D in vitro assays, and individual samples
are subjected to multiomics or broad-spectrum molecular species monitoring
to understand molecular mechanisms.
4
Miniaturization
of the instrument has become the leading trend as nanoliquid chromatography
coupled to MS has proven to be a workhorse in proteomics
5
and was applied to improve in-depth lipid characterization
6
−
9
in small-volume biological samples. However, reproducibility, long
run times, and maintenance challenges hamper the broader penetration
of nanoflow into metabolomics and lipidomics studies.
10
On the other hand, microflow chromatography (<100
μL/mL)
enables a balance between sensitivity and reproducibility, as recently
demonstrated in various proteomics studies.
11
−
14
Microflow separation is enabled
in a standard UHPLC system using 1 mm i.d. columns, and was successfully
evaluated and implemented in proteomics
12
,
13
and metabolomics
15
,
16
studies. Previous studies have employed microbore separation to
pursue lipidomics.
17
−
20
However, a study collectively presenting microbore separation method
optimization is needed as a reproducibility assessment, with benchmarking
against a standard narrow-bore column.
Cerebral organoids (COs)
derived from pluripotent stem cells recapitulate
the human brain’s complexity and are a functional alternative
to exploring the etiology of neurological disorders, including Alzheimer’s
and Parkinson’s diseases.
21
,
22
Omics technologies
applied to an iPSC-derived cell biology model system are a powerful
approach to investigating phenotypes and underlying disease pathophysiology.
23
−
25
Here, we have focused on developing single CO lipidomics to achieve
high analytical throughput and avoid commonly used pooling of biological
replicates that are tedious, costly, and compromise statistical evaluation.
We evaluated the microbore column in an exploratory lipidomics
study using a standard widely available UHPLC system. We use a 1 ×
100 mm RPLC column at a 100 μL/min flow rate coupled to a three-stage
quadrupole mass spectrometer. The optimized reversed-phase gradient
condition achieved a ∼4-fold increase in response compared
to that of conventional lipidomics methods. Further, we probed the
lipid composition of a single iPSC cerebral organoid, and more than
300 samples were acquired over 75 h to prove the quantitative performance.
We have shown that microflow separation allows cholesterol measurement
in a single lipidomics method, simultaneously with other lipid classes.
As a proof of concept, we studied the difference in lipid metabolism
of APOE phenotypes of iPSC cerebral organoids. Our study reveals that
APOE4/4 causes widespread lipid dysregulation in a relevant disease
model.
Experimental Section
Detailed information on chemicals,
reagents, and cell culture is
provided in the
Supporting Information
.
Sample Preparation
Cerebral organoids (COs) were washed
with PBS, treated for 1 h with cell recovery solution (CRS, Corning,
NY, USA) at 4 °C, and rewashed with PBS. For targeted lipidomics
analysis, a single CO was used; ten biological replicates per condition
were acquired in technical duplicates. CO was homogenized in a microtube
with a glass bead (Benchmark Scientific, Edison, NJ, USA). A 100 μL
portion of 80% IPA was added to the homogenate for lipid extraction.
The sample was vortexed (1 min), sonicated (37 Hz, 5 min), and mixed
(10 min, 2000 rpm). Then 85 μL of the supernatant was removed
and mixed 1:1 with a mixture of internal standards (
Table S2
) for lipidomics and stored at −20 °C
until LC-MS analysis. The sample was injected in 80% IPA. The removed
protein pellet was dried in the SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Savant
SDP121 P, ThermoFisher Scientific). The dried protein pellet was consequently
reconstituted to perform the BCA protein determination.
Experimental Conditions of μLC-MS/MS
The lipid
extract was analyzed using 1290 Infinity II UHPLC (Agilent) with a
low void volume mixer (10 μL) coupled to 6495 Triple Quadrupole
mass spectrometer (Agilent). The lipid extract (1 μL) was injected
on the reverse phase microbore column (CSH, 1 × 100 mm, 1.7 μm,
Waters) and separated in gradient elution mode at 100 μL/min
flow rate over 15 min. The mobile phase A was 10 mM ammonium formate
in acetonitrile/water (60:40), and the mobile phase B was 10 mM ammonium
formate in isopropanol/acetonitrile (90:10). A 1 mL portion of Milli-Q
water was used to dissolve ammonium formate, which was then added
to the mobile phase B bottle. The mixture was shaken vigorously and
sonicated for 5 min to ensure solubility. The gradient elution program
was as follows: 0 min 15% B, 1.86 min 30% B, 2.32 min 48%, 9.5 min
82% B, 12.5 to 13.5 min 99% B, and 13.5 to 15 min column re-equilibration.
The positive ion mode parameters of the jet stream were: gas temp
200 °C, gas flow 14 l/min, nebulizer pressure 45 psi, sheath
gas temp 400 °C, and sheath gas flow 8 l/min; capillary voltage
4 kV, nozzle voltage 500 V, and unit resolution for Q1 and Q3. Data
were acquired in positive ion mode using the dynamic selected reaction
monitoring (SRM), with a 2 min retention time window per transition.
Batch samples were analyzed on the same day in a randomized order
to minimize internal variation. After every four-matrix injection,
a blank sample was submitted to avoid carryover and ensure chromatography
column and ion source cleaning. QC samples were injected after every
eight samples throughout the batch analysis to monitor reproducibility
by calculating the coefficient of variation (%CV). Only lipid species
with CV < 30% were considered for biological interpretation.
26
Data Processing and Statistical Analysis
Raw data files
were processed using Mass Hunter Quantitative analysis (B.07.00, Agilent
Technologies) software. Lipids were quantified using the SRM transition
reported in the literature.
27
−
29
Collision energies were optimized
by directly injecting a mixture of 16 class-specific internal standards.
Lipid nomenclature was followed per the LIPID MAPs consortium guidelines.
30
Identified lipid species were separated based
on retention behavior of carbon number or double bond of homologous
lipid series.
31
Only the sum composition
of lipid species was provided as high-resolution MS/MS was not acquired
for the more profound structure elucidation. The study aimed to conduct
a case/control comparison; therefore, only relative concentrations
of lipid species were calculated using single-class-specific internal
standards. However, the literature presents alternative methods for
reporting absolute lipid concentration, which may be particularly
useful in clinical studies or studies where the data must match with
global or in-house reference values.
32
The
relative lipid concentrations were further normalized to the protein
content to account for the variability in organoid cellular mass.
The average protein concentration for an individual cerebral organoid
was ∼31 μg.
Results and Discussion
Optimization of Gradient and Flow Rate for the Microbore Column
A robust LC-MS instrument is capable of analyzing many samples
while maintaining the analytical performance. LC parameters require
careful optimization, as they influence the number of identifications,
ion suppression, and the overall experiment reproducibility. First,
we investigated the performance of a microbore (1 mm i.d.) column
under 12 linear gradient conditions (
Table S3
), including various flow rates (50, 75, 100, and 150 μL/min)
and linear gradient durations (11, 22, and 33 min). A mixture of 15
lipid standards (
Table S2
) was analyzed
to assess the class-specific influence on the LC conditions. UHPLC
hardware modifications to reduce extra column band broadening associated
with microbore columns were reported.
12
,
13
We replaced
column outlet tubing with 50 μM i.d. nanoViper (Thermo).
Figure
1
A summarizes the
average peak intensity, full width at half maximum (FWHM), and peak
capacity for the tested gradient conditions.
Figure 1
(A) Optimization of lipidomic
gradient conditions using a microbore
column (1 × 100 mm). Fifteen lipid standards were analyzed at
12 gradient conditions, including four different flow rates (50, 75,
100, and 150 μl/min) with three different gradient durations
(11, 22, and 33 min). Summary of the relative average peak intensity,
full width at half maximum (FWHM), and average peak capacity. (B)
Comparison of microbore (1 × 100 mm) and conventional narrow
bore column (2.1 × 100 mm), depicted in black and red, respectively.
Microbore separation increases the response 3.7-fold at a comparable
peak width.
As expected, the average peak intensity and FWHM
decreased as the
LC flow increased. A peak broadening during longer gradients decreased
the average peak intensity. Our data suggest that a 50 μL/min
flow rate combined with a 33 min gradient results in broad peaks and
a dramatic decrease in peak intensity. The peak capacity for each
tested flow rate increased with the gradient length, as shown in
Figure
1
A. However, this
is at the expense of a reduced peak height and increased instrument
time. Consequently, a reduced signal-to-noise ratio hampers the detection
of the low-abundance lipid species. We choose the 11 min gradient
duration for the final method as it resulted in maximal peak intensity
with the narrowest peak width. Reduced flow rate improves the ionization
efficiency and hence increases peak intensity, but causes peak broadening.
Also, low flow rates (50 and 75 μL/min) did not elute the hydrophobic
lipid species, such as CE and TG at short gradient duration. Therefore,
we chose a 100 μL/min flow rate and 11 min gradient duration
for the lipidomics sample analysis. The total gradient duration was
15 min including an additional 2.5 min nonpolar solvent elution of
longer chain TG and CE, followed by 1.5 min equilibration time.
To benchmark the microbore column (1 × 100 i.d. mm) performance
with the high-flow narrow bore column (2.1 × 100 i.d. mm), we
employed optimized gradient conditions (flow rate 100 μL/min,
15 min gradient length). The narrow bore column flow was 420 μL/min
to keep the constant linear velocity. We analyzed 15 lipid internal
standards (
Table S2
) to assess the difference
in peak intensity and FWHM. As lower LC flow rates compromise reproducibility,
our study focused on optimizing gradient conditions and probing the
quantitative performance of batch analysis.
Interestingly,
we observed a significant increase in peak intensity
(
Figure
1
B) for the
DG (16-fold) and CE (6.8-fold). A reduced flow rate probably improves
the ionization efficiency of the relatively hydrophobic lipid species.
For microbore separation, the FWHM of all lipid standards was 0.08–0.22,
similar to the peak width on narrow bore elution (
Figure
1
C), except for early eluting
lipids such as LPC, LPE, and carnitines, which produced broader peaks
in microbore separation. The peak intensity and FWHM for 15 lipid
internal standards for the microbore and narrow-bore separation are
provided in
Table S4
and
Table S5
. In-depth structural annotation could not be pursued
during the triple quadrupole analysis. However, our data demonstrated
a similar peak resolution compared to narrowbore separation for the
isobar and isomer.
Figure S1
depicts the
relative elution profile of the SRM transition (746.5 > 184), which
represents the three phospholipid species (PC 33:1, PC O-34:1, and
PC P-34:0).
Figure S2
shows the relative
separation of the four different species of triglycerides (TG 52:0,
TG 52:1, TG 52:2, and TG 52:3).
Application to Single iPSC-Derived Cerebral Organoid (CO) Lipid
Profiling and Batch Analysis of 303 Samples
Our optimized
microflow LC-MS/MS method (positive ion mode, 15 min gradient duration)
identified 351 lipid species across 23 lipid classes from the lipid
extract of a single cerebral organoid. The average size of a single
cerebral organoid is equivalent to ∼40 μg protein. Generally,
biological assays require a pool of organoids or spheroids, which
is technically challenging and costly. A microscale separation was
interfaced with a three-stage quadrupole mass spectrometer to substantially
boost the sensitivity to leverage high-throughput single cerebral
organoid lipidomics (
Figure
2
A). We profiled iPSC-derived cerebral organoids using a dynamic
SRM method to routinely probe the lipid metabolism associated with
a disease or a perturbation. Relative retention in reversed-phase
microbore column of lipid classes LPC, LPE, SM, Cer, HexCer, PC, PE,
PI, PG, PS, DG, TG, Cholesterol, and CE is depicted in
Figure
2
B. Certain anionic lipid classes
(CL, BMP, PA, and PIP) and free fatty acids (FA) were excluded from
the analysis as they preferentially ionize in negative ion mode.
33
If not baseline separated, BMP 36:2 can contribute
to quantitative results of the structural isomer PG 36:2 as they share
the same SRM transition in positive ion mode. Polarity switching is
proposed to sensitively analyze the compound of diverse physiochemical
polarity into a single LC-MS run.
34
,
35
The pseudo-SRM
is used for the lipid classes such as fatty acids, which poorly fragment
into electrospray ionization.
36
Figure 2
Single iPSC
Cerebral Organoid (CO) lipidomics using μLC-MS/MS.
(A) Each CO sample was subjected to single-step lipid extraction (80%
isopropanol) and injected for a lipidomics profiling (15 min). (B)
Relative elution of 351 lipid species quantified from a single CO.
(C) Consecutive 303 injections acquired for the assessment of reproducibility.
PCA plot shows a tight clustering of pool QC samples injected after
every eight injections during the batch analysis. (D) Overlay of the
base peak chromatogram and back pressure of the first (green) and
last (black) injection demonstrate the high stability of microbore
lipid separation during the batch analysis.
Lipidomics method reproducibility is essential
for biological interpretation.
Quantitative performance depends on peak shape, stable instrument
response, retention time, etc. The 2.1 mm i.d. narrow bore column
has been a workhorse for lipidomics studies; robustness is widely
accepted. We demonstrate the reproducibility of a 1 mm i.d. microbore
column, continually analyzing lipid extract from 220 single cerebral
organoid samples spiked with 16 lipid internal standards for the single
point calibration of 351 lipid species. A QC sample was injected after
every eight injections to monitor reproducibility, and a blank sample
was injected after every four injections to clean the column. In total,
303 injections were continually acquired over 75 h. Principal component
analysis (
Figure
2
C)
shows a tightly clustered pool QC sample, which shows the reproducibility
of a method during the batch analysis. Two separate groups on the
PCA plot represent the APOE phenotypes 3/3 and 4/4.
Figure
2
D depicts the superimposed
base peak chromatogram and LC system backpressure trace between the
first and last injection of batch analysis. A percentage coefficient
of variation (%CV) < 30 is acceptable in narrow bore separation
of lipids species.
27
,
37
−
39
In the present
study, the median coefficient of variation (CV) of 351 lipid species
was 12.95% and only 26 showed a CV >30%. The median coefficient
of
retention time variation was 0.1%, indicating stable and robust LC
gradient elution conditions. Our data demonstrate the robustness of
microbore columns to be applied to large-scale lipidomics studies.
While we expect that the increased sensitivity will also benefit untargeted
lipidomics, the potential of microbore versus narrow bore separation
for such analyses still needs to be evaluated.
Reproducible Measurement of Cholesterol by Microbore Separation
Free cholesterol (FC) maintains the cell membrane fluidity and
lipid homeostasis. Therefore, measuring free cholesterol and cholesteryl
ester (CE) is paramount in clinical and basic science.
40
Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS)
is applied routinely to quantify CEs and other lipids classes. Poor
ionization of FC in ESI impedes the quantification using UHPLC-MS/MS.
Therefore, most lipidomics studies measured cholesterol independently
using acetate
40
or sulfate
41
derivatization to improve electrospray ionization or other
techniques such as GC-MS, APCI-MS, etc.,
42
which is cumbersome and time-consuming. A recent article reveals
that cholesterol measurement is not included in LC-MS lipidomics of
cerebral organoid samples.
43
,
44
In principle, the ESI
ionization efficiency improves with low flow rates. Our microscale
method (100 μL/min) resulted in a ∼4-fold increase in
response to all lipid standards compared to the standard separation
method (420 μL/min). It compelled us to test the electrospray
ionization of free cholesterol by using microscale separation. SRM
transitions were optimized for d7-cholesterol by injecting (LC flow
of 50 μL/min) directly into a three-stage quadruple mass spectrometer.
ESI MS/MS spectra are depicted in
Figure S3
. Two best-performing transitions were selected: quantifier (376
> 81) and qualifier (376 > 147). Furthermore, d7-cholesterol
was spiked
into cerebral organoid lipid extract in the 1–100 μg/mL
dilution series (
Figure
3
A), resulting in R2 > 0.9 linear regression range for both transitions.
We measured cholesterol and other lipid species in a single lipidomics
method in a batch analysis of 303 samples as explained in the previous
section. Assessment of the QC sample reveals excellent reproducibility,
indicating a coefficient of variation of 18.79% for the quantifier
and 14.10% for the qualifier (
Figure
3
C). Application of our method reveals perturbation
of cholesterol metabolism in APOE phenotypes, which is discussed in
a subsequent section. In summary, we have shown that microbore separation
coupled with QqQ mass spec allows the sensitive and robust measurement
of cholesterol and other lipid classes in a single lipidomics method,
significantly increasing the throughput of sample analysis.
Figure 3
Sensitive and
reproducible measurement of cholesterol using microflow
LC-MS/MS. (A) Standard curve and goodness of fit (
R
square) for d7-cholesterol spiked in cerebral organoid matrix, SRM
quantifier 376 > 81 and qualifier 376 > 147 transitions. (B)
LC-MS
response of cholesterol from single cerebral organoid lipid extract.
(C) Reproducibility of cholesterol measurement from the pool QC sample
injected throughout batch analysis of 303 samples.
APOE Phenotypes Reveal Distinct Lipid Profile
The E4/4
allele of the Apolipoprotein (APOE) gene is considered an important
genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. However, the underlying
pathophysiological mechanism is not clear.
45
Apolipoprotein plays a crucial role in the brain by transporting
cholesterol to maintain cell membrane homeostasis. APOE4 is shown
to be hypo-lipidated compared to APOE3, and pathological effects are
linked to the disruption of lipid metabolism.
46
Therefore, we performed global lipidomics to elucidate the difference
in lipid metabolism between the APOE3/3 and APOE4/4 phenotypes of
AD patient-derived iPSC cerebral organoids. Lipid extract of APOE3/3
and APOE4/4 (
n
= 10 biological replicates per condition)
cerebral organoids were subjected to analysis using the optimized
microflow LC-MS/MS method. Principal component analysis (
Figure
4
A) of 351 lipid species
(23 lipid classes) shows a significant change in the lipid metabolism
of the APOE phenotypes.
Figure 4
APOE phenotypes (E3 and E4) show differential
lipid metabolism
in (A) principal component analysis of APOE 3/3 and APOE 4/4 iPSC
AD cerebral organoid (
n
= 10). (B) Relative response
of major lipid class between APOE phenotypes. (C) Lipid species with
4 or more double bonds are downregulated in E4 CO, shown for total
CE and two species of phosphatidylcholine (PC 40 and PC 38); the emaining
individual species shown as heat map (D). Mann–Whitney test
performed using GraphPad Prism (9.3.1); * < 0.05, ** < 0.01.
Next, we investigated APOE phenotype-dependent
change in the lipidome
at the level of lipid classes (
Figure
4
B) and species. Most of the glycerolipids (GPs), such
as triglycerides (TGs) and diglycerides (DGs), were accumulated in
the E4/4 cerebral organoid. Several publications have observed E4-dependent
lipid droplet accumulation or hypertrigyecerenia.
47
We see upregulation of cholesterol level on the E4/4 phenotype,
in contrast to downregulation of downstream metabolite cholesteryl
ester. In mammals, cholesterol synthesizes steroidal hormones and
is required for cell membrane and lipid draft formation. Cholesterol
dysregulation poses a profound risk to the normal function of the
brain. Therefore, the relationship between altered cholesterol metabolism
and neurodegenerative disorder is actively investigated using various
in vitro and preclinical model systems.
45
A study on iPSC-based brain cells revealed that APOE4 decreases
the astrocyte’s apolipoprotein level and increases the level
of cholesterol.
48
Cholesteryl ester significantly
improves cholesterol transport, as it can be packed into the interior
of lipoprotein particles. Downregulation of cholesteryl ester indicates
compromised cholesterol transport in E4 phenotypes,
49
potentially linked to the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s
disease. An in-depth phospholipid analysis shows no significant change
in total phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylinositol,
and phosphatidylglycerol levels between APOE phenotypes, except for
the upregulation of total PS, PE O, and lysolipids LPC and LPE in
APOE4/4 cerebral organoids. Interestingly, most lipid species with
4–7 double bonds from the PC, PE, and PI were downregulated
in the APOE4/4 phenotype, while lipid species with 0–3 double
bonds showing no change or upregulation.
Figure
4
D depicts the heatmap showing the relative
intensity of lipid species (
p
< 0.05, 2 ≥
fold change) from the CE and phospholipids. Regardless of the unsaturation
status of acyl chains, all the lipid species of PS were upregulated
in APOE4/4. Saturated fatty acids increase membrane rigidity. Oppositely,
unsaturated fatty acids like PUFA enhance membrane fluidity, thus
controlling various biological functions.
50
The study reveals that only fatty acids containing 4 or more double
bonds enhance cell membrane fluidity and APP. Fatty acids with 3 or
fewer double bonds show no effect.
51
Therefore,
our data suggest that APOE4/4 impaired the esterification of polyunsaturated
fatty acids (4 or more double bonds) into phospholipids and cholesteryl
ester. APOE4/4 shows increased ceramides, sphingomyelins, and dihydroceramides
while decreasing hexosylceramides. Gene expression study has shown
a gradual increase in ceramide during the decline of cognitive function
and a decrease in the synthesis of glucosyl ceramide.
52
Our study demonstrated widespread lipid dysregulation in
the APOE4/4 iPSC cerebral organoid system for the first time.
Conclusion
We demonstrated the application of 1 mm
inner diameter microbore
column-based separation to perform exploratory lipidomics analysis.
The gradient conditions optimized microbore separation using a standard
UHPLC system to achieve the optimal performance. The developed method
shows an average 3.7-fold increase in response compared with the conventional
lipidomics method while maintaining a similar peak width. The presented
single-shot μLC-MS/MS method quantifies 351 lipid species from
23 lipid classes from the single iPSC-derived cerebral organoid in
15 min. Consecutively, we analyzed 303 samples over 75 h to benchmark
the quantitative performance. The median coefficient of variation
(CV) of 351 lipid species was 12.95%, and only 26 lipid species showed
a CV higher than 30%. We have shown that microflow separation coupled
to three-stage quadruple MS substantially increases the sensitivity
and allows robust cholesterol measurement in a single method with
other lipid species from a single cerebral organoid sample. Here,
we deliberately processed a single cerebral organoid to enable a
high-throughput in vitro assay and sample preparation and analyzed
the samples only in positive ion mode to achieve an analytical throughput.
Finally, the optimized high-throughput lipidomics method was applied
to elucidate the difference in lipid homeostasis between APOE3/3 and
APOE4/4 AD iPSC cerebral organoids. Our results reveal that APOE4
causes widespread lipid dysregulation, including cholesterol and sphingolipid
metabolism. Interestingly, our data reveal that the APOE4/4 phenotype
interferes with the incorporation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (4
or more double bonds) into phospholipids and cholesteryl esters. Thus,
we have revealed APOE4/4-induced lipid alteration in a human-relevant
3D model, which could potentially link to the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD). Further, the developed workflow extended to elucidate
the phenotype-dependent lipid dysregulation of tramiprosate,
53
a pharmaceutical candidate developed to treat
AD patients.
54
Our report is the first
to demonstrate that a microbore column-based LC-MS platform enables
sensitive, high-throughput, and robust measurement of the global lipidome.
This work paves the way for more applications of microflow separation
in lipidomics.