Introduction
The ability to achieve quantitative detection
of specific molecules,
chemical markers, or nanoscale assemblies in bodily fluids is at the
heart of medical laboratory diagnostics.
1
Examples range from early detection of toxins,
2
microbiological agents,
3
or
tumoral biomarkers,
4
to the routine monitoring
of patients with chronic diseases such as diabetes,
5
thrombophilia,
6
or myelodysplastic
syndromes.
7
Typical diagnostic bioassays
comprise enzyme immunohistochemistry,
8
liquid
chromatography,
6
protein and genetic electrophoresis,
9
and blood cultures.
10
While these methods offer good levels of sensitivity and specificity,
they suffer from several drawbacks. First, they tend to be time-consuming
and require purification and preparation steps, which can potentially
alter the antigen under investigation and affect the detection itself.
9
Second, they are often expensive due to their
complexity and the need for reagents or advanced experimental setup.
Finally, they tend to require relatively large volumes of bodily fluids.
Part of the problem comes from the complexity of bodily fluids, which
contain a wide size and compositional range of molecules, proteins,
biopolymers, and cells, often at concentrations significantly larger
than that of the desired detection target. Additionally, most bodily
fluids are highly non-Newtonian,
11
and
their inherent compositional heterogeneity renders physical detection
methods such as mechanical resonators
12
or nanofluidics-based approaches
13
challenging.
As a result, detection methods operating directly into raw bodily
fluids are sparse, especially when aiming to detect and quantify a
specific target within that fluid. Being able to operate with small
quantities of unprocessed bodily fluids could prove a game changer
for detection and medical prognosis, potentially cutting costs and
diagnosis time as well as offering measurements better reflecting
the natural environment of the desired target.
Here, we show
that quantitative measurements can be achieved in
single drops of saliva by combining immunorecognition with mechanical
detection optimized to operate on the correct scale. Saliva is arguably
one of the most challenging bodily fluids to operate in given the
presence of large biopolymers forming gel–liquid structures,
but this can be overcome by accordingly adapting the mechanical sensing.
The choice of saliva is also motivated by its potential for noninvasive
and real-time diagnostics of infective and neoplastic diseases.
14
,
15
To illustrate the capabilities of our method, we target the model
and native extracellular nanovesicles (EVs). EVs are small (30–300
nm) phospholipid-based vesicles present in most bodily fluids including
blood, saliva, and urine.
16
,
17
They are secreted by
cells into the surrounding connective matrix and are naturally used
as vehicles to cargo small molecules, proteins, and nucleic acids
between distant cells and throughout the body.
16
EVs play a key role as autocrine and paracrine signals
16
regulating multiple cellular functions from
growth and apoptosis
18
to gene expression
and antigen presentation.
19
They have been
suggested as biomarkers for early detection and monitoring of various
diseases including cancer,
20
,
21
diabetes and metabolic
conditions,
5
,
22
neurodegenerative pathology,
and viral or microbiological infections.
23
Several pathologies promote the release of specific EVs with a unique
combination of antigens in terms of both type and concentration.
17
However, routine use of EVs in diagnostics is
currently still limited by the costs and slowness previously highlighted.
Additionally, existing characterization methods tend to focus on genetics
and proteomics and require relatively expensive purification and concentration
of milliliters of bodily fluids
24
,
25
with no accepted standards.
Using vibrating microcantilevers suitably functionalized, we are
able to bypass these issues and quantify specific EV populations directly
into saliva. Vibrating microcantilevers have long been used as biosensors,
26
,
27
including proposed approaches for cancer detection,
12
but operating in liquids tends to limit the sensitivity
of the technique,
28
and most applications
rely on sensing in vacuum, air, or purified solutions.
26
More recent developments in the field of nanomechanical
systems have focused on optomechanical resonators
29
or sophisticated bespoke systems
30
to achieve high levels of sensitivity. However, operating directly
in complex biological fluids remains a significant challenge, limiting
applicability, use, and direct diagnostics. Here, we show that saliva
exhibits scale-dependent viscoelasticity, a property that we exploit
to operate in raw saliva with a sensitivity comparable to that achieved
in pure water. The proposed approach can be upscaled, parallelized,
and in principle applied for the detection of a wide range of targets
directly in complex fluids.
Experimental Section
Ultrapure water was purchased
from Water AnalaR NORMAPUR, VWR International
Ltd., Leicestershire, UK. For all of the experiments using saliva,
fresh samples were obtained from healthy volunteers (two of the authors)
and used on the same day. The saliva samples were collected in the
morning between 7:00 am–9:00 am after overnight fasting, directly
into a sterile glass vial, and used without any further processing
or purification. The samples not immediately used were kept at 5 °C
(measurements conducted later in the day) and warmed to the measuring
temperature (25 °C) immediately before use, taking care to keep
the sample homogeneous. For the experiments using model EVs, the desired
quantity of EVs was added to the sample, which was then homogenized
in a mild sonication bath (see details in the
Model
EVs
section hereafter).
Shear Rheometry
Shear rheometry was performed using
a commercial Advanced Rheometer model AR 2000 (TA Instrument, New
Castle, DE, USA), equipped with 8 mm parallel plates and an environmental
test chamber under nitrogen gas. The fluids were compressed between
the parallel plates under atmospheric pressure until a gap of approximately
1 mm thickness and a small normal force was registered by the rheometer.
To determine the full rheological response, oscillatory tests were
performed at angular frequencies between 0.1 and 600 rad/s, and with
strain amplitudes of 1%, after examination of the dynamic strain sweep
as a function of frequency. The temperature was kept constant at 25
°C.
Microrheology
Microrheology measurements were performed
using a Malvern Zetasizer NanoZSP (Malvern Panalytical, Worcestershire,
UK). The tracer particles were silica nanospheres with nominal diameters
of 50, 100, and 300 nm monodispersed in water with a concentration
of 10 mg/mL (nanoComposix, San Diego, CA, USA). The silica particles
were then diluted in water or saliva to a final concentration of 0.1
mg/mL and tip-sonicated for 45 s to remove any aggregates. Before
microrheological measurements were conducted, standard dynamic light
scattering (DLS) ensured a monodisperse distribution of the particles.
Lipid-Coating of the Tracers
Lipid-coating of the tracers
was performed by incubating small unilamellar lipid vesicles (SUVs)
of 1,2-dioleoyl-
sn
-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC)
into a PBS solution (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na
2
HPO
4
, and 1.8 mM KH
2
PO
4
at pH 7.4)
containing the dissolved silica tracers. To ensure full coating, we
estimated the total surface area of the tracers in solution and used
a 10-fold excess of fluid lipid vesicles (in terms of total bilayer
area) adsorbing onto the silica particles. The particles were then
diluted in PBS to the desired concentrations for the experiment. DOPC
was purchased in liquid form, dissolved in chloroform (Avanti Polar
Lipids, AL, USA), and used without any further purification. After
chloroform evaporation in a vacuum overnight, lipids were resuspended
in a PBS solution at a final concentration of 10 mg/mL. PBS solution
was produced using preprepared tablets (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO,
USA). SUVs of diameter ∼100 nm were obtained by bath-sonicating
the lipid solution at 25 °C for 10 min to produce a uniformly
clear solution, followed by extrusion through a 100 nm filter (WhatMan,
Sigma-Aldrich) with at least 31 passes, and then used immediately.
Model EVs
Model EVs were prepared with a biotinylated
lipid mixture. The lipid mixture comprised 99.5% dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine
(DPPC) and 0.5% biotinylated-DPPE (1,2-dipalmitoyl-
sn
-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine). Both lipids were purchased from
Avanti Polar Lipids, AL, USA, and mixed to the desired ratio in chloroform.
The chloroform was then evaporated in a vacuum overnight. After resuspending
the lipids in PBS and bath-sonicating them at 60 °C for 15 min,
SUVs were then prepared by extrusion through a 100 nm filter. The
desired proportion of model EVs was then added to the saliva samples
and bath-sonicated for 5 min before use.
Cantilever Functionalization
Cantilever functionalization
was performed using the same lipid mixture used for the model EVs
(99.5% DPPC + 0.5% biotinylated DPPE). Before functionalization, the
cantilevers underwent thorough cleaning procedures to ensure the removal
of any potential contaminants.
31
−
33
The cantilevers were immersed
in a bath of ultrapure water, followed by propan-2-ol (Merck Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA), and finally ultrapure water, for 60 min at each
step. The propan-2-ol was used as purchased without further purification.
The cantilevers were then exposed to low-pressure air plasma, at
a pressure of 1 mbar and power of 300 W (VacuLAB Plasma Treater, Tantec)
for 30 s. Plasma-oxidation increased the hydrophilicity of the cantilevers
and removed unwanted carbon contaminants. A drop of SUVs (150 μL)
with a concentration of 1 mg/mL was drop-cast on the cantilever. After
a 20 min incubation, the cantilevers were gently rinsed with freshly
prepared PBS and left soaking in clean PBS for 1 h to ensure removal
of any excess nonadsorbed vesicles. After this, the cantilevers were
rinsed again with PBS.
The cantilevers were then further functionalized
using streptavidin
(Thermofisher, UK), which acted as a bridge between the two biotinylated
lipid bilayers forming the EVs’ surface and the cantilever
coating. The streptavidin functionalization was performed by first
soaking the probes in a solution containing 0.1 mg/mL streptavidin
in PBS. After incubation for 1.30 h, the cantilevers were gently rinsed
with PBS and then left soaking in clean PBS for 1 h.
The cantilevers
used in the detection of naturally occurring EVs
needed a further functionalization step. This involved the binding
of anti-CD9 and anti-CD81 monoclonal antibodies to the streptavidin
functionalized cantilevers. The antibodies were obtained by recombinant
DNA technique, with a human species reactivity and purchased from
ABCAM, UK. The binding of the antibodies to the streptavidin was performed
by biotinylation conjugation using the specific Biotin Conjugation
Kit (Fast, Type A) Lightning-Link (ABCAM, UK). The cantilevers used
for the negative controls were functionalized with streptavidin (
Results
section:
Testing the
Method with Model EVs
) and pure DPPC (
Results
section:
Detecting Specific Natural EV Subpopulations
in Human Saliva
). The design of suitable controls is further
discussed in the
Supporting Information
.
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
The experiments on the
dynamic response of vibrating microcantilevers in water and saliva
were conducted using a commercial Cypher ES AFM (Oxford Instruments,
CA, USA) instrument equipped with temperature control. We used two
types of commercial cantilevers with each cantilever calibrated using
its thermal spectrum.
34
Initial experiments
(
Figure
1
) were conducted
with OMCL-RC800PSA silicon oxide cantilevers (Olympus, Japan) that
exhibit a stiffness of 0.1–0.2 N m
–1
and
a resonance frequency of 20 ± 5 kHz in air. All the quantitative
measurements were conducted with stiffer and shorter AC55-TS silicon
oxide cantilevers (Olympus, Japan), which exhibit a typical flexural
stiffness of 50 ± 5 nN/nm and a resonance frequency of 1600 ±
300 kHz in air. High-quality V1 muscovite mica discs (SPI supplies,
West Chester, PA, USA) acted as a substrate where to deposit the fluid
of interest; 150 μL of the fluid of interest was deposited on
the mica substrate. All the experiments were performed at 25.0 °C
to ensure thermal stability.
35
,
36
Thermal equilibrium
is achieved ensuring that the cooling/heating rate of the temperature
control system within the AFM is constant for at least 20 min. After
thermal equilibrium was achieved, the cantilever was then fully immersed
in the fluid, with its motion driven by photothermal excitation.
Figure 1
Probing
saliva’s viscosity at different length scales. (
a
) Macroscopic standard shear rheological measurements highlight
the non-Newtonian behavior of raw saliva (red) in comparison with
pure water (blue). (
b
) The nanoscale viscoelastic behavior
of raw saliva is also probed using a vibrating microcantilever operated
with an AFM. The viscosity of the liquid surrounding the cantilever
can be quantified from the frequency shift of the vibration resonances,
41
with the method applied here to comparatively
probe the viscosity of water and of raw saliva. No shift is observed
between water and saliva (dashed lines), and the derived viscosities
for saliva are identical to water within error (inset in
b
) (see
Experimental Section
and
Figure S1
for more details). The microcantilever
measurements were performed using a commercial microcantilever (Olympus,
OMCL-RC800 PSA) at 25.0 ± 0.1 °C, with the probe fully immersed
in liquid.
Results
Scale-Dependence of Saliva’s Viscoelasticity
Saliva, like most bodily fluids, is a complex fluid and exhibits
a nonlinear viscoelastic behavior upon applied mechanical strain.
37
Although the specific properties of saliva are
person-, time-, and condition-dependent,
38
,
39
typical rheological measurements reveal viscosities 1 order of magnitude
larger than for water in identical conditions (
Figure
1
). This is due to the presence of numerous
large biopolymers which underpin saliva’s non-Newtonian behavior,
39
even preventing flow through a 200 nm filter.
40
At the macroscopic scale, the viscoelastic differences
between pure water and saliva are obvious at all accessible shear
rates (
Figure
1
a) and
consistent with previous studies.
39
At
the nanoscale, viscomechanical sensing can be performed with vibrating
microresonators.
29
Considering the rheological
findings, mechanical sensing in saliva could be expected to induce
a significant reduction in the frequency and amplitude of any vibrating
resonators compared to pure water. Interestingly, this is not necessarily
the case, as illustrated here using a vibrating commercial microcantilever
immersed into either water or saliva and operated with an AFM (
Figure
1
b). We could not
observe any significant variation between the measurements obtained
in pure water and saliva for oscillation amplitudes smaller than ∼20
nm: the amplitude and frequency of the microcantilever’s resonances
remain broadly unchanged (
Figures
1
b and
S1
for more details).
This suggests that the cantilever experiences a nearly identical environment
between water and saliva. To further quantify this observation, we
use the resonance frequencies of the vibrating microcantilever to
determine the viscosity of saliva as experienced at the probed vibration
frequencies.
41
A constant viscosity value
identical to that of pure water within error was found at both 32
and 98 kHz (second and third resonances, inset
Figure
1
b, see also
Supporting Information section 1
for further details).
A careful
comparison of all the resonances in water and in saliva (
Figures
1
b and
S1
) indicates that the same conclusion holds,
regardless of the frequency probed: no systematic frequency shifts
to lower values are observed from water to saliva as would have been
expected for a higher viscosity liquid.
41
To rationalize this apparently counterintuitive finding, it is necessary
to consider the structure of saliva across scales. Saliva can be understood
as a (bio)polymeric mesh, filled primarily with water.
42
Proteins and small biological objects such as
EVs are dissolved into the water and fill the mesh structure where
they can diffuse freely within gaps. The mesh itself is not a static
cross-linked structure, but any structural rearrangement of the polymeric
network is significantly slower than that of the water it contains,
hence conferring saliva its non-Newtonian macroscopic behavior. Because
standard rheological measurements are macroscopic, they are dominated
by the viscoelastic behavior of the polymeric mesh under strain, with
its pronounced viscous and elastic responses (see
Supporting Information Figure S2
). In contrast, microcantilevers
operate with nanoscale oscillation amplitudes comparable in size to
the gaps naturally existing in the polymeric mesh. If the oscillation
amplitude
A
of the vibrating cantilever is smaller
than the average gap size
S
of the mesh, the cantilever
primarily experiences the viscous water diffusing within the mesh,
with limited impact of the polymers on the measurements.
It
is important to keep in mind that, while useful, the idea of
saliva as a mesh is a simplification of reality, and no single value
of
S
exists. Instead,
S
can be understood
as an effective size marking the transition from a polymer-dominated
(at larger scale) to a water-dominated viscoelastic behavior at smaller
scale. This scale-dependent viscoelasticity has previously been reported
43
in complex fluids and is likely common given
their hierarchical structure. Here, we exploit this scale-dependence
to enhance the detection capability of microcantilevers operating
directly into saliva: if the oscillation amplitudes are small enough,
the sensing microcantilever effectively operates in a simple aqueous
solution, where a significantly better signal-to-noise ratio can be
achieved.
To achieve enhanced microcantilever detection in saliva,
we first
set out to objectively identify the value of
S
. The
fact that saliva cannot flow through a ∼200 nm filter while
water can easily pass through it
13
,
40
suggests that
S
< 200 nm. This is consistent with the fact that no
significant differences between water and saliva could be observed
for immersed microcantilevers vibrating with amplitudes below ∼20
nm (
Figure
1
b), suggesting
S
to be in the 20–200 nm range. To independently
quantify
S
, we used microrheology
44
with tracers ranging from 70 to 370 nm (see
Supporting Information section 3 and Table S1
). If the tracers are able to diffuse freely within the mesh (
Figure
2
a), their mean square
displacement (MSD) is expected to follow standard Brownian diffusion
and grow linearly over time.
44
,
45
In contrast, if the
tracers’ diffusion is hampered by the mesh (
Figure
2
b,c), a subdiffusive
45
behavior is expected whereby the MSD is proportional
to the time at a power α < 1. It is therefore convenient
to track the anomalous diffusion exponent α for each tracer
in order to distinguish “free” (α = 1) from mesh-hindered
(α < 1) diffusion. An example of microrheological measurements
is shown in
Figure
2
d,e, carried out with silica spherical nanoparticles as tracers.
The average diameter of the particles is 73 ± 6 nm (50 nm nominal,
see
Table S1
), and the use of silica tracers
is motivated by the fact that the surface of the microcantilevers
is primarily silica.
Figure 2
Passive microrheology of raw saliva with silica tracers.
A cartoon
representation of the system (
a
–
c
) illustrates the fact that smaller tracers (
a
) can
diffuse more easily through the mesh formed by saliva compared to
larger tracers (
b
). However, this assumes a limited interaction
of the tracer particles with the mesh. Otherwise, interactions with
the mesh reduce mobility (
c
) and affect smaller particles
relatively more due to their larger surface to volume ratio. (
d
) Example of a measurements with a 73 ± 6 nm tracer
(without coating) showing the MSD <
r
2
> as a function of time
t
on a log–log
plot.
In pure water, <
r
2
> ∝
t
indicating normal Brownian diffusion. In saliva, <
r
2
> ∝
t
α
with α < 1, the so-called anomalous
diffusion exponent
indicating subdiffusion. (
e
) The evolution of α
at different time scales highlighting differences for water (α
≈ 1, blue curve) and saliva (α < 1) with and without
a zwitterionic antifouling coating on the tracer (red and black curves,
respectively). Over a short observational time scale (<10 μs),
the tracers are able to freely diffuse unhindered. Over longer time
scales or for larger tracers, the impact of interactions with saliva
components tends to hamper the diffusion. Measurements >0.5 ms
are
less reliable, being close to the tracking limit of the equipment.
Here, this is visible in α becoming lower for coated than uncoated
tracers, despite a significantly larger MSD. (
f
) Time
evolution of α for tracers of different sizes. Comparison of
α vs tracer size at selected times (10 μs, 25 μs,
50 μs, 0.1 ms, 0.25 ms, and 0.5 ms, vertical dashed lines) suggests
consistent unhindered diffusion for tracers <25 nm (inset). All
the particles’ diameters are measured by DLS using the same
setup as for the microrheology (see
Figure S3 and Table S1 within section 3 of the Supporting Information
).
As immediately obvious from the measurements, when
operating in
saliva, it is crucial for the tracers to be coated with an antifouling
layer so as to prevent nonspecific binding to saliva’s constituents.
In principle, nonspecific binding can occur with salivary proteins
(e.g., mucin fibers, lactoferrin, IgA), ions (calcium, phosphate,
carbonate, and thiocyanate ions),
1
and
the biopolymeric mesh itself, resulting in a lower mobility of the
tracers (
Figure
2
c).
The issue of biofouling is common to most measurements in biologically
active environments,
13
often deteriorating
the accuracy and precision of the measurements over time.
46
Here, it must be addressed since the microcantilever-based
detection strategy implicitly assumes that saliva’s biopolymers
do not bind to the cantilever but rather move around it if occasionally
disturbed. If the polymers attach to the cantilever, the latter becomes
part of the mesh and hence primarily measures the mesh’s viscoelastic
behavior, something we aim to prevent. To tackle this issue, we coat
the tracers with a self-assembled zwitterionic lipid bilayer. The
zwitterionic nature of the lipid headgroups significantly reduces
unwanted interactions and enhances the tracers’ diffusion,
as evidenced by the clear increase in α (black to red,
Figure
2
d,e). Coating with
a zwitterionic bilayer is a simple and effective antifouling strategy
and is systematically used hereafter. Practically, the coating also
increases the measured diameter of the tracers by ∼8 nm, consistent
with the size of two bilayers (
Supplementary section 3 and Table S1
).
Focusing on the evolution of the anomalous
diffusion coefficient
for different size tracers (
Figure
2
f), it is immediately clear that the larger the size
of the tracer, the smaller the value of α. In other words, larger
tracers are more hindered by the polymeric mesh, resulting in an accentuated
subdiffusive behavior regardless of time. By plotting the α
value as a function of the tracers’ size at set times, it is
possible to infer the tracer size
S
which would satisfy
α = 1 (
Figure
2
f inset). We find
S
= 25 ± 10 nm regardless
of the time considered. This provides an objective estimate for
S
, indicating that smaller objects can, on average, diffuse
freely through saliva as if it were a purely Newtonian fluid.
Testing the Method with Model EVs
Based on the microrheology
results, we use microcantilevers coated with an antifouling zwitterionic
layer and oscillating with an amplitude smaller than
S
= 25 nm. In practice, the smaller the oscillation amplitude, the
better, providing a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio. This is typically
achieved using microcantilevers as small and stiff as possible, thereby
ensuring a comparatively high resonance frequency and quality factor
(see
Supporting Information section 4
)
and hence sensitivity. Here, we use Olympus AC55 cantilevers (see
Experimental Section
) which offer some of the highest
resonance frequencies and quality factors among commercially available
levers.
To validate the proposed approach, we conducted a set
of experiments aiming to quantify the amount of synthetic model EVs
dissolved into raw saliva. The interest of using model EVs is twofold:
first, since the saliva sample is prepared with a known concentration
of model EVs, it allows for independent determination of the setup
sensitivity. The concentration of a specific native EV’s subpopulations
in saliva varies between individuals
47
and
experiments,
47
,
48
making any independent measurements
highly challenging. Here, the model EVs occur precisely as one of
these subpopulations but with a unique protein marker and a specific
concentration. Second, a comparison of the known EV concentrations
with the measured quantities allows for calibration of the setup.
To best mimic natural EVs in size and composition, we create 100 nm
gel-phase phospholipid (DPPC) vesicles, with 0.5% of the lipids exposing
a tether biotin acting as a specific EV marker (
Figure
3
a). The model EVs, dissolved in a standard
phosphate buffer saline (PBS) solution, are then mixed with the raw
saliva to achieve the desired final concentration, but always ensuring
that the EV solution represents only 5% of the total saliva volume
to minimally affect saliva’s properties (
Figure
3
b).
Figure 3
Characterization and testing of the proposed
approach for targeted
detection of specific EV subpopulations directly in raw saliva. The
testing is carried out with model EVs composed of DPPC with 0.5% biotinylated
lipids acting as surface markers (
a
) and dissolved into
saliva (5% of the total volume from a phosphate buffer saline solution
(
b
)). The cantilever is coated with a DPPC bilayer containing
0.5% biotinylated headgroups (
c
), preventing biofouling
while ensuring specific binding of the model EVs after further streptavidin
functionalization (
d
). From the changes in the cantilever’s
vibration amplitude, phase, and frequency, the total mass of the target
EVs binding to the cantilever can be precisely quantified despite
the saliva background (
e
). Experimental data are fitted
globally with a double exponential function, imposing the same two
time scales (τ
1
and τ
2
) for all
the experiments. The most important differences occur within the first
5–10 min (τ
1
= 346 ± 56 s), with only
the slower evolution (τ
2
= 5781 ± 778 s) present
at 0.1 μg/mL and in pure saliva. (
f
) The maximum
mass uptake (added mass at time = ∞) derived from the fitting
also exhibits a double exponential increase against the EV concentration
in saliva. All of the measurements are conducted at 25.0 ± 0.1
°C. The error in concentration (
f
) is assumed to
be 10%, likely an overestimate.
The microcantilevers are functionalized with the
same gel-phase
phospholipid bilayer containing 0.5% of biotinylated lipid headgroups.
In this configuration, 99.5% of the zwitterionic headgroups act as
a relatively robust antifouling layer with the membrane in gel phase;
the biotinylated headgroups can specifically bind the model EVs after
further functionalization of the microcantilever with streptavidin
(
Figure
3
c,d). An AFM
is used to track any changes in the cantilever resonance over time,
allowing for quantification of the mass uptake associated with specific
EV binding to the cantilever (see
Supporting Information sections 4–5 and Figures S4–S5
for more details).
The results show a clear sensitivity to the model EVs binding to
the cantilever (
Figure
3
e), with meaningful measurements achieved at concentrations down
to 0.3 μg/mL in a single drop (100 μL) of saliva. The
sensitivity threshold appears to be around 0.3 μg/mL, where
the readout becomes close to the control. While the natural concentration
of native EVs in saliva is not known, various studies estimate a range
1 or 2 orders of magnitude greater than the present sensitivity achieved.
49
,
50
Interestingly, a rapid uptake is visible over the first 5–10
min, followed by a slower uptake also present in the control experiment
(pure saliva). This suggests that a quantitative readout is possible
in less than 30 min despite the small sample volume and the absence
of any sample preparation or conditioning of the sample. This compares
favorably to the standard EV characterization methods based on affinity
columns,
51
provided no quantification of
the EVs’ encapsulated cargo is needed.
A consistent analysis
of the results was achieved by globally fitting
all the experimental results with a double exponential and imposing
the same two time scales for all the experiments (
Figure
3
f). The evolution of the mass
uptake with time,
m
(
t
), is fitted
with the following equation:
1
where
M
is
the maximum mass uptake in each experiment, and
m
1
and
m
2
are the concentration-dependent
fitting coefficients associated with the global time scales τ
1
and τ
2
. The use of a double exponential
model to describe an adsorption process evolving over two distinct
time scales is usually referred to as the Largitte double step kinetics
model.
52
The initial rapid uptake is not
visible for the control and the lowest EV concentration (0.1 μg/mL),
and the associated coefficient
m
1
are
hence set to zero. When plotting
M
against the EV
concentration
C
present in saliva at the start of
the experiment (
Figure
3
f), a two-regime behavior emerges. Near the detection threshold,
M
increases rapidly with
C
, likely limited
only by diffusion of the target EVs to the surface of the sensing
cantilever. As more and more EVs get tethered to the surface, the
binding rate decreases due to the fact that diffusing EVs need to
find an uncovered region of the cantilever to bind. In this interpretation,
this second regime dominates at larger
C
where it
reduces the dependence of
M
over
C
, as visible in
Figure
3
e. Significantly, since the evolution of
M
with
C
is determined by the ability of EVs to bind to the microcantilever,
Figure
3
f effectively acts
as a calibration curve for microcantilevers with the specific surface
geometry used here. Additionally, since the technique requires only
a drop of fluid, it can easily be multiplexed to simultaneously quantify
multiple EV targets and improve accuracy.
Detecting Specific Natural EV Subpopulations in Human Saliva
The results presented in
Figure
3
validate the possibility of EV detection directly
in bodily fluids using vibrating microcantilevers. However, in the
absence of a precise reference or accepted standard for the EV populations
naturally present inside bodily fluids, it is not yet obvious whether
the method can achieve meaningful measurements of natural EV subpopulations.
To test this, cantilevers identical to those used in
Figure
3
are functionalized with antibodies
able to selectively bind common natural markers. We selected members
of the tetraspanin family (CD9 and CD81) as markers.
53
,
54
CD9 and CD81 are cell surface glycoproteins which mediate a wide
range of cell functions from B–T cell interactions to platelet
activation
53
and aggregation. Naturally
occurring EVs with these markers are present in every bodily fluid
of a healthy human being,
53
but variations
in their concentration could indicate neoplastic evolution
54
or other diseases.
55
Even if the range of concentration in healthy subjects remains to
be determined with currently no accepted standard, the associated
EVs have been suggested for early cancer diagnostics.
54
,
56
Here, they are used as a generic test for the setup’s capabilities.
Figure
4
shows the
results for the detection of natural EVs exhibiting CD9 or CD81 in
the saliva of two different healthy individuals. The functionalization
process is similar to that used for model EVs but with an additional
step wherein a biotinylated version of the desired antibody is tethered
to the exposed streptavidin receptor of the cantilever. Informed by
the calibration experiment (
Figure
3
), the measurements are conducted over only 60 min
and analyzed using the same double exponential fitting with the values
of τ
1
and τ
2
imposed as the values
found in
Figure
3
(τ
1
= 346 s, τ
2
= 5781 s) except for the baseline
fitted with a single exponential. The results show a clear difference
in mass uptake between the baseline (black) and the cantilever functionalized
with the tetraspanin antibodies (blue and red). The data are well
fitted by the double exponential function with the imposed time scale,
confirming the generality of the model in this configuration. Interestingly,
the results highlight interindividual differences in the total content
and ratio of EVs expressing CD9 and CD81 antigens. This further shows
the potential of the proposed method to contribute to novel diagnostics
and developing personalized medicine. Using the results from
Figure
3
f as a calibration,
we estimate that the concentrations of the EVs expressing CD9 and
CD81 antigens are respectively 10.3 ± 0.9 and 1.5 ± 0.2
μg/mL for individual 1 and 8.2 ± 1.1 and 36.1 ± 9.0
μg/mL for individual 2. We emphasize that these values cannot
be independently verified in this study and were derived on the implicit
assumptions that the setup behaves similarly as with model EVs, with
a similar affinity for the microcantilever and without any uspecific
fusion of the EVs with the cantilever’s antifouling lipid layer.
57
These assumptions are not obvious and will require
further work to confirm their reliability and benchmark the technique.
58
Additionally, complications with the current
multistep functionalization make it difficult to achieve consistent
control measurements (see
Supporting Information section 6 and Figures S6–7
). Nevertheless, the present
results show that the setup has the potential to detect and quantify
specific subpopulations of EVs naturally occurring in human saliva.
Figure 4
Detection
of two natural EV subpopulations expressing CD9 and CD81
antigens on their surface, measured in saliva. The experiments are
performed on a drop of unprocessed saliva samples from two healthy
individuals. The cantilevers are functionalized as described in
Figure
3
but with antibodies
(Ab) to the targeted tetraspanin (see
Experimental
Section
). The control probes (black) are coated only with the
antifouling DPPC bilayer. As for model EVs, the mass uptake is rapid
over the first 5–10 min and can be suitably analyzed imposing
the same time scales as in
Figure
3
. The control is analyzed with a single exponential
yielding in both cases a characteristic time scale of ∼550
s (see
Supporting Information sections 6
for details). Experiments with anti-CD9 and anti-CD81 Abs were repeated
twice for each sample with the average shown in the figure.
Discussion
Complex fluids are ubiquitous in nature
from bodily fluids to water
waste, oil reservoirs, lubricants, and food products. They play a
key role in science and technology and are at the forefront of active
research.
59
Most complex fluids are composed
of a mixture of macromolecules dissolved in a Newtonian fluid, with
the dynamics of these macromolecules conferring the resulting solution
its non-Newtonian behavior. Here, we show that saliva exhibits a scale-dependent
viscoelastic behavior due to the finite size of the biopolymers forming
a macromolecular mesh-like structure. At the nanometer level, saliva
can be considered as a Newtonian fluid, whereas the non-Newtonian
behavior emerges at a scale characteristic of the mesh. While we only
investigate saliva in this study, the observed scale-dependent viscoelasticity
is likely to be valid for many complex fluids that exhibit a similar
structure over scales, but the relevant scales are likely to be fluid
specific. For saliva alone, autoimmune pathologies altering the content
of mucin fibers and antibodies in saliva and other bodily fluids
1
could influence the diffusion length scale of
tracers. This is also the case for any other complex fluids whose
specific composition is expected to impact the diffusion length scale
and, consequently, the mobility of sensing microcantilevers. Thus,
the design of any detection methods for complex fluids should include
a “calibration step” assessing this characteristic length
scale.
We show that the scale-dependence can be exploited for
conducting
mechanical sensing directly in the complex fluid while retaining the
signal-to-noise ratio normally only possible in simple Newtonian fluids.
Calibration and testing of the setup with model lipid vesicles dissolved
in raw saliva show a sensitivity in the picogram range, with the intrinsic
detection noise level of the setup below this range. Based on the
size and composition of the model EVs, we estimate their mass to be
on the order of 0.001 pg (∼1 femtogram/model EV), suggesting
an effective EV detection sensitivity in the range of 500–1000
EVs. The mass of natural EVs is likely significantly higher when taking
into account the nucleic and proteic compounds, thereby increasing
the sensitivity per EV. Additionally, the system used here solely
relies on commercial equipment and could be significantly improved.
First, the sensing cantilevers could be replaced by bespoke cantilevers
with a geometry optimized for maximizing the sensing surface while
retaining the ability to operate with small amplitudes and high frequencies.
Second, the sensing could be developed with self-actuating microresonators,
bypassing the need for the expensive laser system of the AFM. Finally,
the process is suitable for parallelizing with multiple sensors operating
over the same drop-size sample. This would open the possibility for
simultaneous repeats and averaging as well as complementary detection
of multiple targets, thereby improving the statistical accuracy and
predictive power of the detection.
Detection of native EVs expressing
the tetraspanin CD9 and CD81
antigens suggests that the setup is able to directly pick these subpopulations
from saliva samples of healthy individuals. Here, tetraspanins are
used as a test owing to their ubiquity in bodily fluids EVs. Several
studies suggest that CD9 and CD81 expression may have a clinical significance
in neoplastic diseases, but these are usually not seen as specific
enough to represent a clear diagnostic tool.
60
−
65
In fact, the results shown in
Figure
4
indicate significant variations in the concentration
detected between healthy individuals (see also
Supporting Information section 7 and Figure S8
for more details).
Variations may also occur over time for the same healthy individual,
something we did not explore. Further work is needed to assess the
suitability of the method on more specific targets, something potentially
more challenging to achieve if the associated EV subpopulation is
significantly smaller. Several antigens have already been identified
for immunocapture of EVs from patients with different diseases including
cancer, and the method could make a significant difference in routine
testing and early detection, especially considering the relatively
rapid readout (<20 min). However, while it is generally well established
that EVs carry information about diseases such as lung,
8
esophageal,
66
pancreatic,
67
and breast
68
cancers,
there is no robust consensus on the most reliable markers with multiple
candidates reported. It is therefore necessary to comparatively test
several candidate markers on biopsies from healthy, precancerous,
and malignant cancer patients. If successful, this would fully validate
the technology and open the door for testing other potential diseases
with this method.
Conclusion
In this study, we show that the viscoelastic
properties of saliva
are scale-dependent, with the liquid behaving as a Newtonian fluid
at the nanoscale. This is due to the comparatively large scale of
the dissolved biopolymers and cell materials that create a slow-evolving
mesh through which water and small molecules can move freely. Using
microrheology, we demonstrate that tracers smaller than ∼25
nm can diffuse freely provided they do not interact with the biomesh.
We exploit this finding to achieve quantitative mechanically based
detection of model lipid nanovesicles with a specific biomarker directly
inside drops of unprocessed saliva. We illustrate the potential of
the technique to detect specific subpopulations of EV based on proteic
markers. More work is needed to independently benchmark the technique
and confirm the detection of specific EVs. The fact that the detection
method is mechanical could also be further exploited to sense pathological
variations in the EVs’ mechanical properties,
69
for example using higher vibration eigenmodes of the lever.
12
,
27
Finally, although the focus of the present study is on EV quantification
motivated by cancer detection, the method can be in principle applied
to the detection of any kind of nano-objects in suitable complex fluids,
from viruses to nanoparticles and toxins. It could be particularly
useful where samples are limited in quantity or where a relatively
rapid answer is needed, for example, the analysis of toxicity changes
and pollutant level after each treatment step in wastewater recovery.