Introduction
Proteins in biofluids are mostly quantified
using immunoassay-based
methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) or electrochemiluminescence
immunoassays (ECLIAs). Because these immunoassays are known to be
poorly standardized, leading to significant variation between manufacturers,
reagents, and reagent lots, there is a strong need for improving metrological
traceability using reference measurement procedures (RMPs).
1
,
2
By convention, chromatographic methodology with mass spectrometric
detection (LC-MS) has been used as the most promising RMP.
3
,
4
Bottom-up LC-MS assays are the most used LC-MS assays in bioanalysis,
in which one or multiple peptides, produced after proteolytic digestion
of the protein, are selected as representative for the intact protein,
followed by quantification using selective tandem mass spectrometry
(MS)-based methods.
5
Using this approach,
peptides carrying a post-translational modification (PTM) are mostly
avoided as this complicates the method development and the production
of reference materials and internal standards.
6
The downside of this signature peptide selection is that valuable
information about the protein is thus lost, as the presence of isoforms
and PTMs may carry valuable pathophysiological information.
7
−
10
Also, quantification of isoforms requires careful selection of signature
peptides
11
,
12
and the development of such peptide-centric
isoform specific methods requires additional development steps and
is time-consuming.
11
,
13
−
15
Different
from bottom-up or middle-down based methods, (intact)
top-down MS analyzes the full protein, retaining information both
for different isozymes and for PTMs.
16
−
21
Top-down strategies using liquid chromatography (LC) HRMS have been
gaining popularity for the analysis of intact proteins as an alternative
for bottom-up analysis, specifically for the characterization of protein
isoforms.
15
,
16
,
22
However, quantification
using top-down approaches has its own challenges.
23
Intact MS requires high-resolution (HR) MS, such as time-of-flight
(ToF), FT-ICR, or Orbitrap mass analyzers,
24
,
25
instruments that are not yet widely available in routine clinical
laboratories.
26
,
27
Analytical sensitivity is also
relatively low because of the multiple charge states of large proteins
and additional ion suppression due to matrix effects.
28
For intact top-down MS methodology to be applied in clinical
diagnostics, the required fully characterized and commutable reference
materials and full-protein-labeled internal standards pose a significant
challenge due to the complexity of the protein analytes. Next to that,
no standardized method for this type of data integration is currently
used. Data integration can be performed in various ways, such as full
scan followed by quantitative deconvolution, quantification based
on reconstruction of extracted ion chromatograms (XIC), or even more
targeted top-down MS/MS measurements.
29
Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is a biomarker composed of αγ-
and γγ-dimers. The γ-isozyme is predominantly expressed
in neurons and neuroendocrine cells, including neuroendocrine tumors
such as small-cell lung cancer (SCLC).
30
,
31
NSE has been
reported to be a promising tumor marker for the diagnosis and follow-up
of SCLC.
32
A bottom-up LC-MS assay has
already been developed to quantify this biomarker.
11
However, the development of an intact top-down LC-MS method
could lead to a simplified method for the possible incorporation of
PTMs in the analysis. This research focuses on NSEγ, a 47.2
kDa, 434 amino acid long protein, due to specificity for neurons and
neuroendocrine cells (UniProt accession number
P09104
).
31
With this top-down LC-MS method, we quantified
the acetylated form of NSEγ, likely a PTM, which we described
in previous work.
33
Normally, serum NSE
concentrations are in the low nanogram per milliliter (nM) range.
Elevated concentrations of NSE are linked to lung cancer with a cutoff
value of ≥25 ng/mL.
32
To achieve
absolute quantification of NSEγ, we aimed to first
develop an immunoaffinity enrichment assay using magnetic beads to
isolate and purify the low-abundance protein tumor biomarker; second
optimize the chromatographic separation between the biomarker and
interfering compounds; third produce and use an internal standard
to perform a reliable immunoaffinity isolation and quantitative determination;
and fourth evaluate multiple quantification approaches based on quantitative
deconvolution and reconstructed XICs and their subparameters, such
as the amount of selected charge states and isolation windows.
The method uses protein G-labeled Dynabeads magnetic beads that
are functionalized and cross-linked with monoclonal anti-NSEγ
antibodies for protein isolation and purification, followed by UPLC
coupled to HR-QToF-MS analysis. The presented method relies on the
use of internal standard calibration using a reference protein with
an extra (amino acid) mass label as internal standard (IS) and NSEγ-IS
(47,603 Da) and recombinant NSEγ (47,137 Da) as calibrators
to quantify endogenous acetylated NSEγ (47,179 Da).
33
Both recombinant or endogenous NSEγ are
co-captured using an antihuman NSE antibody via magnetic bead immunoprecipitation
followed by intact protein quantification using LC-HR-QToF-MS, as
displayed in
Figure
1
.
Figure 1
Endogenous (acetylated) NSEγ quantification is performed
by spiking NSEγ depleted serum with increasing concentrations
of recombinant NSEγ and the NSEγ internal standard (IS)
to obtain a calibration curve based on the recombinant NSEγ:NSEγ-IS-ratio.
The obtained calibration curve is used to back calculate the endogenous
(acetylated) NSEγ concentration based on the endogenous (acetylated)
NSEγ:NSEγ-IS-ratio.
The novelty of the described approach is in the
combined setup
of immunoaffinity extraction and the use of an engineered full-length
protein calibrator and a labeled internal standard to reliably quantify
a complex and low-concentration protein tumor marker. This is the
first validated top-down method that can potentially be used in the
diagnosis of lung cancer. In the field of clinical laboratory analysis,
there is also a great need of such assays to be used as a reference
measurement procedure to standardize immunoassays. The presented methodology
does not require tryptic digestion of proteins as applied in bottom-up
methods and thus has great potential as a reference measurement procedure
because it can improve precision, sensitivity, selectivity, and robustness.
Materials
and Methods
Chemicals and Reagents
An anti-human NSE 9601 SPTN-5
monoclonal mouse antibody was obtained from Medix Biochemica (lot:
0046841) (Espoo, Finland). Protein G Dynabeads and BS(PEG)
5
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, Massachusetts,
USA). LC-MS-grade mobile phase solvents were obtained from Biosolve
(Valkenswaard, The Netherlands).
Reference and Internal
Standard Protein Expression
Recombinant NSEγ and NSEγ-IS
were expressed in
Escherichia coli
BL21
(DE3) cells with a pET28a(+)
plasmid (GenScript Biotech UK Limited, Oxford, United Kingdom). Both
proteins were expressed and purified following standard procedures
using Ni-NTA column purification, corresponding tag cleavage using
SUMO-hydrolase or thrombin protease, and reversed Ni-NTA column purification
to remove cleavage enzymes and cleaved purification tags (
S1
). Sequences before and after tag cleavage
are displayed in
S2
. Exact mass and purity
were confirmed using high-resolution high-resolution QToF LC-MS (
S4
). Additionally, LC-UV measurements were performed
for both proteins (
S3
). Both purified proteins
were dissolved and aliquoted in 20 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.4, 150
mM NaCl, and 0.5 mM TCEP and stored at −80 °C until use.
Recombinant NSEγ and NSEγ-IS had respective formulas of
C
2089
H
3308
N
568
O
650
S
13
and C
2106
H
3347
N
575
O
654
S
13
, with corresponding molecular weights of
47,137.07 and 47,602.66 Da, respectively. The theoretical NSEγ-masses
were calculated accurately using the atomic weights of common elements
in proteins (land plants with the C3 metabolic process and other organic
sources): C: 12.01079, H: 1.007968, N:14.00669, O:15.99937, and S:
32.0639 Da.
34
Antibody Coupling to Protein
G-Functionalized Magnetic Beads
The coupling procedure was
performed as published in previous work
11
,
33
,
35
using LoBind Falcon tubes, according
to the following general procedure for one equivalent (
n
): 8.33 μL of protein G-labeled Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) were washed twice in 250 μL of
conjugation buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate, 70 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween
20 (v/v), pH 8.0). The supernatant was removed, and 250 μL of
8 μg/mL Anti-h NSE 9601 dissolved in conjugation buffer was
added to the beads. After 30 min of incubation with rotation, 1.25
μL of 5 mM BS(PEG)
5
dissolved in cold conjugation
buffer was added (final concentration 25 μM) and incubated for
30 min with rotation. The reaction was quenched by adding 25 μL
of 1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, for 15 min with rotation. The supernatant
was removed, and unbound antibody was eluted by adding 50 μL
of elution buffer (1 M NaSCN in 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5) for
5 min with rotation. The beads were then washed twice with 250 μL
of PBS, 0.1% Tween 20, pH 7.4, and subsequently stored in this buffer
at 4 °C until further use. For large-scale experiments, volumes
were multiplied by the number of equivalents (
n
).
Immunoprecipitation
For all serum samples described
in this study, 50 μL of the prepared antibody coupled beads
were transferred to 1.0 mL of sample in a 2 mL LoBind Eppendorf tube.
Samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with 20 rpm rotation
frequency, and after removal of the supernatant, the beads were successively
washed two times with 200 μL of PBS, pH 7.4; after the first
wash, the bead suspension was transferred to a new 2 mL LoBind Eppendorf
tube. The wash solvent was removed, and the beads were then resuspended
in 50 μL of elution buffer (Milli-Q/ACN (80:20) + 1.0% FA) and
incubated in a shake incubator at 1200 rpm for 5 min at room temperature.
Successively, the magnetic beads were removed, and the supernatant
was transferred to LC-MS vials for analysis.
Preparation of NSE-Depleted
Serum
NSE-depleted serum
was prepared as described previously.
11
Whole blood of 10 healthy volunteers was collected in 8.5 mL Vacutainer
SST II Advance Plus Blood Collection Tubes (Becton Dickinson, Franklin
Lakes, New Jersey, USA) during routine venipuncture. The sera were
obtained within 1 h after collection by centrifugation for 10 min
at 2683
g
at 20 °C and subsequently pooled. Depletion
of NSE from serum was performed in six incubation steps using the
prepared antibody coupled beads. After incubation, the serum supernatant
was collected, and the captured NSE was eluted using 1 M NaSCN. The
beads were re-equilibrated prior to renewed addition to the serum
supernatant. The remaining NSE concentration was checked four times,
after each consecutive cycle, using the bottom-up LC-MS/MS procedure
described previously
11
and an ECLIA assay
using an Elecsys analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreutz, Switzerland).
The NSE concentration was found to be under the detection limit after
four depletion cycles.
LC-HR-QToF-MS
Analysis of the eluted
proteins was performed
on a Waters Xevo G2-XS HR QToF coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC I-class
binary solvent manager and ACQUITY UPLC Sample Manager-FL (Milford,
Massachusetts, USA). An Agilent Polaris C18-A 2.0 × 100 mm, 3
μm, Agilent Polaris C18-A 2.0 × 150 mm, 3 μm (Agilent
Technologies, Middelburg, The Netherlands) and Thermo Fisher MAbPAC
2.1 × 100 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts,
USA) were used for chromatographic separation with a flow of 0.3 mL/min
and a column temperature of 60 °C for the Polaris columns and
80 °C for the MAbPAC column. The mobile phases consisted of (A)
0.1% FA in Milli-Q water (MQ) (<5 ppb total organic carbon (TOC)
and (B) 0.1% FA in ACN. The gradient in minutes per percentage of
mobile phase B was set as follows (all displayed as % v/v): 0.0–11.5
min (25–50% B), 11.5–12.5 min (50–75% B), 12.5–13.0
min (75% B), 13.0–13.1 min (75–25% B), 13.1–15.0
min (25% B). Electrospray ionization (ESI) was operated in positive
ionization mode. MS settings were set as follows: capillary voltage
0.8 kV, sampling cone 40, source offset 80, source temperature 120
°C, desolvation temperature 450 °C, cone gas 10 L/h, and
desolvation gas 1000 L/h. Prior to the batch analysis, the instrument
was calibrated using phosphoric acid over a range of 100 to 2000 M/z.
LeuEnk (556.27 M/z) was used as LockSpray (calibration) during each
measurement at 0.5 min intervals. All LC-MS parameters were controlled
using MassLynx software (Waters, version 4.2).
Data Analysis
Quantitative deconvolution was performed
by selecting the five most abundant peaks in the full-scan spectrum.
MaxEnt1 deconvolution was performed using MassLynx software (Waters,
version 4.2) over a range of 46,000 to 49,000 Da. A simulated isotope
pattern was used with a spectrometer blur width of 0.330 Da as a damage
model. Left and right minimum intensity ratios were set at 33%. Completion
was set to iterate to convergence. For optimization purposes, resolution
was varied between 0.1 and 2.0 Da/channel. After deconvolution, peaks
were centered using the described settings, and peak area was obtained
for quantification. XICs were produced by isolating 1 up to 10 charge
states from the protein, ranging from the 49+ to 58+ protein charge
states with isolation windows starting from 0.1 to 5.0 Da. For quantification
purposes, peak integration was performed using the obtained reconstructed
XICs.
Calibration and Validation
The intra- and interassay
precision and accuracy of NSEγ quantification were investigated
for 3 days (
n
= 5, for each day). Recombinant NSEγ
was spiked at 5.0 (lowest QC), 15.0 (low QC), 40 (medium QC), and
80 (high QC) ng/mL in NSE-depleted serum (NDS) samples. The intra-
and interassay precision and accuracy were analyzed at the four QC
levels according to the calculations by Krouwer and Rabinowitz.
36
Data were expressed as coefficients of variation
(% CV) and accuracy (%). Calibration standards were prepared in NDS
at 6.25, 12.5, 25.0, 37.5, 50.0, 75.0, and 100 ng/mL recombinant NSEγ,
combined with IS at 10 ng/mL. Additionally, blank (no NSEγ,
IS only) and double-blank samples (no NSEγ, no IS) were analyzed.
For each analytical run, XIC peak areas of NSEγ with IS corrections
were plotted versus the nominal protein concentrations. Additionally,
deconvoluted peak areas of NSEγ with IS corrections were plotted
versus the nominal protein concentrations. The nominal concentrations
of the calibration standards were fitted using 1/
x
weighted regression using GraphPad Prism (version: 10.2.1 (395),
GraphPad Software LLC, San Diego, California, USA). The limit of detection
(LoD) and limit of quantification (LoQ) were calculated according
to the following formulas: LoD: 3.3 × standard error of
Y
-intercept (Sy.x)/best-fit slope (B1), LoQ: 10 × standard
error of
Y
-intercept (Sy.x)/best-fit slope (B1).
The carryover was determined by integrating the peak area in a blank
sample after the highest calibration sample of 100 ng/mL. Limits for
carryover are ≤20% of the LLoQ signal and ≤5% of the
IS signal and are based on the EMA guidelines.
37
The analyte recovery was determined by spiking a serum
sample before and after immunoprecipitation. Matrix effects were determined
by spiking anonymized residual serum of six individuals with 50 ng/mL
NSEγ, and the differences between the measured values and nominal
concentrations were calculated and expressed as percentage deviation
(%).
Comparative Study
The endogenous (acetylated) NSEγ
concentrations in serum of 23 selected study participants from lung
marker study NL9146, ICTRP Search Portal (who.int)) described elsewhere,
11
,
32
,
38
−
41
ethically approved by the Medical
Research Ethics Committees United (NL58985.100.16), were quantified
using a recombinant NSEγ calibration curve. Eight no malignancy,
seven nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and eight small-cell lung
cancer (SCLC) samples were measured using both a commercially available
ECLIA (Cobas platform e801, Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland)
and the developed (XIC) MS method and compared using a Bland-Altman
analysis to determine the average difference between the ECLIA and
MS method. Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism (version
10.2.1, GraphPad Software LLC, San Diego, California, USA).
Results
Top-Down
Quantitative Data Integration
Two different
intact protein top-down MS quantification approaches were investigated,
based on peak integration from quantitative spectrum deconvolution
and reconstructed XICs.
Figure
1
A shows the charge-state envelope of recombinant NSEγ,
resulting from a full-scan analysis over a range of 500 to 2000
m
/
z
. This full-scan data was processed
via the two selected methods. A zero-charged deconvoluted mass spectrum
is displayed in
Figure
2
B1, with the effect of deconvolution resolution on the peak area
displayed in
Figure
2
B2. Selected resolutions were 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 Da/channel.
Reduced resolution (corresponding to increased Da/channel) resulted
in higher analytical sensitivity, but with theoretically reduced specificity
as a result. This potentially leads to increased risk of interferences
when analyzing biological samples. Using deconvolution, it is possible
to obtain the intact mass of the protein (recombinant NSEγ 47,137.13
Da), next to the peak intensity determination for quantification.
Figure 2
Full-scan
top-down quantitative data integration of recombinant
NSEγ; full-scan data (A) and quantitative deconvolution (B1,
B2) with 0.1–2.0 Da/channel resolution for peak intensity determination.
Reconstructed extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) using 1 to 10 charge
states for peak area determination (C1, C2). Isolation windows from
0.1 to 2.0 Da for XIC determine the integrated peak width (D1, D2).
Different settings influence the specificity and sensitivity of the
data integration (E).
Figure
2
C1 shows
a series of the most abundant charge states of the protein (charge
states 48+ to 58+) in a
m
/
z
range
of 800 to 1000. Respectively, 1, 3, 5, and 10 charge states were selected
to reconstruct the XIC chromatograms. After integration of the obtained
reconstructed XIC chromatograms, the peak area was found to increase
when a higher number of charge states were included (
Figure
2
C2). However, the specificity
will likely decrease when more charge states are used.
Figure
2
D1 shows
the proteins’ 54+ charge state with XIC isolation windows starting
from 0.1 up to 5.0 Da. A small isolation window results in a highly
specific isolation of the target
m
/
z
. In the case of NSE, the smallest window indeed resulted only in
a partial coverage of the charge-state peak, resulting in a lowered
intensity of the reconstructed peak. A larger isolation window resulted
in a higher intensity and thus more sensitivity.
Figure
2
D2 shows the results for all
of the isolation windows.
Both quantitative deconvolution with
0.1 Da/channel and XIC peak
reconstruction using five charge states with a 0.1 Da isolation window
were used for further calibration and validation experiments in this
study. The two methods were both used to evaluate their applicability
in clinical assays, since no standard quantification method methodology
is currently available in the field of intact protein quantification
using HRMS.
Liquid Chromatographic Method Development
Three analytical
columns were studied for the separation of immunoprecipitated recombinant
NSEγ, from any other proteins that were coprecipitated and eluted
from the magnetic beads. Full-scan chromatograms of the analyses using
a MabPAC column and Polaris 100 and 150 mm columns are displayed in
Figure
3
A1,B1,C1. Chromatographic
resolution was calculated using the NSEγ target peak and interfering
human serum albumin (HSA) peak labeled with “HSA” (
Figure
3
A1,B1,C1). The chromatographic
resolutions were 2.6, 4.2, and 4.4 for the MabPAC, Polaris 100 mm,
and Polaris 150 mm columns, respectively (
Table
1
). The signal-to-noise ratios were determined
using the MassLynx software from the reconstructed XICs (
Figure
3
A2,B2,C2) and were
found to be 713, 247, and 380 for the MabPAC, Polaris 100 mm, and
Polaris 150 mm columns, respectively (
Table
1
). Although the highest resolution was found
using the Polaris 150 mm column, representing better chromatographic
separation, the MabPAC column was selected for further use due to
the higher signal-to-noise ratio, enabling higher analytical sensitivity.
Figure 3
Full-scan
chromatograms (panel 1), reconstructed extracted ion
chromatograms (XIC) (panel 2), and MS spectra (panel 3) using the
respective MAbPAC (A), Polaris 3 C18 100 mm (B), and Polaris 3 C18
150 mm (C) analytical columns for LC-method development of recombinant
NSEγ isolated using immunoprecipitation from NSE-depleted human
serum with nonspecifically co-captured human serum albumin (HSA) as
the main interfering peak.
Table 1
Analytical Performance Based on Chromatographic
Resolution and Signal-to-Noise Ratio of the MAbPAC, Polaris 3 C18
100 mm, and Polaris 3 C18 150 mm Columns for the Analysis of Recombinant
NSEγ Isolated from NSE-Depleted Human Serum Using Immunoprecipitation
panel
column
retention time recombinant
NSEγ
(min)
chromatographic resolution
(HSA/NSEγ)
signal-to-noise
ratio (RMS)
A
MAbPAC
6.27
2.6
713
B
Polaris 100 mm
7.23
4.2
247
C
Polaris 150 mm
7.76
4.4
380
Calibration and Validation
A calibration curve using
NDS spiked with recombinant NSEγ was analyzed on three subsequent
days using weighted linear regression (1/
x
). Linearity
was achieved within the range of 6.25 to 100 ng/mL NSEγ, with
R
2
values of 0.9670 and 0.9407 using reconstructed
XICs and quantitative deconvolution, respectively (
Figure
4
). Both LoD and LoQ were calculated
using the standard error of the
Y
-intercept and the
best-fit slope. The calculated LoD and LoQ using reconstructed XICs
were 3.5 and 10.6 ng/mL, respectively. The calculated LoD and LoQ
using quantitative deconvolution were 4.2 and 12.8 ng/mL, respectively.
Additionally, the carryovers were found to be 9.2% of the LLoQ (acceptable
limit: ≤20%) and 1.7% of the IS (acceptable limit: ≤5%)
and were within the acceptance limits. NSEγ recovery was found
to be 80.6%. The within-run and between-run precision and overall
accuracy were determined during 3 days, for which at each day four
quality control levels were analyzed fivefold (
Table
2
). Using quantitative deconvolution, no precision
could be determined at the lowest-quality control levels, due to the
lack of analytical sensitivity using this methodology. Some between-run
precision values were found to be 0%, due to the calculated between-run
mean squares being smaller than the within-run mean squares (
Table
2
). The average deconvoluted
recombinant NSEγ mass during calibration and validation was
47,137.30 Da with an average MaxEnt error of ±0.61 and 47,602.79
Da with an average MaxEnt error of ±0.36 Da for the NSEγ-IS
(with 47,137.07 and 47,602.66 Da as respective calculated protein
mass). To examine potential matrix effects, residual serum of six
healthy individuals was spiked using 50 ng/mL recombinant NSEγ,
and the concentrations were determined using a recombinant NSEγ
calibration curve after subtracting the endogenous NSEγ signal
from the corresponding unspiked sample. All measured values were found
to be within acceptance limits (≤+–/15%). The average
matrix effect was found to be −3.1% (
S4
).
Figure 4
Calibration of recombinant NSEγ in NSEγ-depleted serum
(NDS) over a range of 6.25 to 100 ng/mL (3 days). Peak integration
using reconstructed extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) (left) and quantitative
deconvolution (right) with weighted linear regression (1/
x
). The recombinant NSEγ:NSEγ-internal standard ratio
is plotted versus the NSEγ concentration (ng/mL).
Table 2
Accuracy and Precision Results for
Immunoaffinity Precipitation Followed by LC-HR-QToF-MS Quantification
of Recombinant NSEγ Based on Quantitative Deconvolution and
Reconstructed Extraction Ion Chromatograms (XICs) (3 Days,
n
= 5)
accuracy
(%, bias)
precision
(%, CV)
quantification method
QC
concentration
(ng/mL)
overall
within run
between
run
deconvolution
lowest
5
N.D.
N.D.
N.D.
low
15
107%
26%
0.0%
a
medium
40
108%
7.6%
13%
high
80
101%
12%
8.0%
XIC
lowest
5
131%
27%
0.0%
a
low
15
114%
9.2%
0.0%
a
medium
40
109%
8.5%
8.5%
high
80
106%
6.8%
3.8%
a
Calculated between run mean squares
being smaller than the within-run mean squares.
Comparative Study
Serum samples
of eight patients without
malignancies, seven with NSCLC, and eight with SCLC were analyzed
with the developed immunoaffinity intact mass analysis MS method with
XIC data integration. All the data (
n
= 23) were
compared to a commercially available ECLIA. The obtained NSEγ
concentrations using the ECLIA method (
y
-axis) were
plotted against the obtained concentration using the MS method followed
by reconstructed XIC data integration (
x
-axis) (
Figure
5
A). The measured
concentrations showed agreement between the two methods with an
R
2
of 0.8786. The analytical bias between the
methods was determined to be 18.5% (95% LoA: −39.5 to 76.5),
as displayed in the Bland-Altman plot (
Figure
5
B). The range of measured NSE concentrations
in sera of patients without malignancy, NSCLC patients, and SCLC patients
were comparable for both assays (
Figure
5
C).
Figure 5
Obtained concentrations using the ECLIA method
vs the developed
MS method with reconstructed XIC data integration with
R
2
= 0.8786 (
n
= 23) (A). Bland-Altman
analysis of the ECLIA and MS method compared with the mean difference
and 95% limits of agreement (LoA) displayed (
n
=
23)) (B). Boxplots of the endogenous NSEγ concentration in patients
without malignancy (
n
= 8), NSCLC patients (
n
= 7), and SCLC patients (
n
= 8) (C).
Endogenous NSEγ concentrations were determined by using a recombinant
NSEγ calibration curve.
Figure
6
shows typical
data for an analyzed patient sample after immunoaffinity purification
followed by LC-HR-QToF-MS. Endogenous NSEγ was found to have
the same elution times compared to recombinant NSEγ and NSEγ-IS.
Although specific monoclonal anti-NSEγ antibodies were used
for immunoprecipitation, nonrelated compounds are also isolated and
detected (
Figure
6
A).
Figure
6
B shows a spectrum
in the range of 600 to 1700
m
/
z
with
both endogenous NSEγ, NSEγ-IS, and other interfering compounds.
Lastly,
Figure
6
C shows
the deconvoluted masses of both isolated endogenous NSEγ and
NSEγ-IS.
Figure 6
Typical data from patient sample analysis. XIC after immunoaffinity
purification followed by intact mass analysis (A). Mixed MS spectra
of endogenous NSEγ and NSEγ-IS (B). MaxEnt 1 deconvoluted
MS spectra of endogenous NSEγ (47,179 Da) and NSEγ-IS
(47,603 Da) (C).
Discussion
This
work describes a robust intact top-down
high-resolution MS
quantification method for lung cancer tumor biomarker NSEγ,
where (unacetylated) NSEγ is used to quantify endogenous (acetylated)
NSEγ. The method comprises an immunoprecipitation step followed
by intact mass protein quantification with a protein IS using LC with
high-resolution quadrupole time-of-flight analysis. Although the analytical
performance of the developed assay showed similar results compared
to the ECLIA assay, future work should focus on the use of an acetylated
recombinant NSEγ and an acetylated NSEγ-IS to be more
representative of the endogenous acetylated NSEγ. Additionally,
the use of a different IS with, e.g., stable heavy isotope
15
N and
13
C labels, instead of an amino acid label should
be investigated.
The optimal settings of quantitative deconvolution
and reconstructed
XICs quantification were evaluated by varying resolution (Da/channel),
the amount of used charge states, and the XIC isolation window. For
quantitative deconvolution, 0.1 Da/channel was selected as the most
optimal setting based on selectivity. For XIC isolation, the use of
five charge states with a window of 0.1 Da isolation was selected
based on sensitivity and selectivity. The selection of the amount
of charge states and windows remains highly specific for each protein
or biomarker. The main takeaway message is that (the amount of) charge
states combined with isolation window need to be carefully selected
to prevent the introduction of nonrelated peaks that might be present;
other literature does not provide a clear consensus on what the best
option is and options are varied within specific studies.
16
,
22
,
42
,
43
When the mass spectrometric resolution is too low to separate the
target from interfering peaks, deconvolution-based quantification
can be a valuable alternative due to its high specificity. However,
it has the downside of being a less sensitive method.
Three
analytical columns were tested for their suitability to separate
NSEγ from nonspecifically isolated interfering proteins after
immunoprecipitation. The MAbPAC column was selected based on resolution
from other chromatographic peaks and highest signal-to-noise ratio.
Notwithstanding the immunoprecipitation, nonspecific protein binding
of mainly HSA remains present, as indicated in
Figure
3
peak “HSA”. The IA-LC method
developed here allowed isolation and separation of NSEγ present
in low ng/mL concentrations from HSA present at around 40 mg/mL. Future
work could additionally focus on the use of lower flow-rate chromatography
such as micro- or nanoflow LC, for improved separation and sensitivity
and can potentially include quantification of other biomarkers, including
NSEα, to determine total NSE concentration in a multiplex fashion.
Two quantification approaches were applied: quantitative deconvolution
and summation of reconstructed extracted ion chromatograms. Deconvolution
offers both quantitative data and can be used to confirm protein presence
by accurately determining the mass, which was nicely demonstrated
by using the validation runs. However, the sensitivity and precision
were lower using quantitative deconvolution compared to quantification
using reconstructed XICs, which could be explained by the deconvolution
algorithm that was used. Peaks with relatively low intensity might
not be accurately reconstructed and are possibly discarded. Also,
due to the complexity of the sample, the deconvolution algorithm might
not be able to distinguish the specific signal from noise. Contrarily,
reconstructed XIC quantitation integrates the full signal within the
specified
m
/
z
range (
Figure
2
D). Acceptable analytical sensitivity,
accuracy, and precision were obtained over the linear dynamic range,
allowing for robust NSEγ quantification. Based on the limited
literature available in the field of quantitative intact protein analysis,
there is currently no standard method for processing this data.
16
,
22
,
43
Since full-scan analysis allows
for both postrun data integration options, quantification using reconstructed
XICs is recommended, followed by mass deconvolution for protein confirmation/identification
purposes. The sensitivity (LoD) 3.5/4.2 ng/mL was higher than a commonly
used ligand binding assay for NSE (0.15 ng/mL); however, the sensitivity
is comparable to other intact protein quantification methods for different
proteins and is more than adequate to achieve the 25 ng/mL cutoff
level for lung cancer.
16
,
32
,
42
Using the MS assay, similar NSEγ concentrations were
found
compared to the ECLIA. Although the antibody used in this study (Anti-h
NSE 9601) has a higher affinity for both human NSE and recombinant
NSE compared to the ECLIA (Anti-h NSE 18E5 and Anti-h NSE 84B10; sandwich),
the developed intact top-down LC-MS assay was found to be less sensitive
compared to the ECLIA.
44
The diagnostic
performances of the MS and the ECLIA in discriminating NSCLC and SCLC
from benign cases were similar, although no significant conclusion
could be drawn due to the limited sample size.
This newly developed
intact mass analysis assay could be the starting
point for the development of an RMP for the standardization of immunoassays.
Standardization might help the broader clinical application of tumor
marker analysis. Current immunoassays are not standardized, leading
to different analytical results between the different immunoassay
platforms, all with the risk of misclassification of the disease state.
More reliable and cross-platform comparable data will lead to an increased
clinical value of tumor marker data; this highlights the clinical
need to standardize these assays using RMPs. This is demonstrated
using the IA- LC-HR-QToF-MS assay developed in this work, combined
with the use of well-defined reference materials such as the unlabeled
reference protein and labeled internal standard protein.
In
conclusion, this novel immunoprecipitation LC-HR-QToF-MS method
makes use of full-length internal standards that allow for correction
of variations in the complete immunoprecipitation method. Using this
method, it is possible to reliably quantify endogenous NSEγ,
a low-concentration cancer protein biomarker in human serum.