1
Introduction
Early childhood caries
(ECC) is defined as the presence of caries
in children under 6 years of age.
1
It adversely
affects children’s physical and mental health and imposes a
substantial economic burden on society.
2
,
3
According to
epidemiological surveys conducted in 2018, the prevalence of dental
caries among 3 year-old children in China reached 50.8%, escalating
to 63.6% at the age of 4, and soaring to 71.9% at the age of five.
4
There is an urgent imperative to thoroughly grasp
the pathology underlying ECC and accurately predict caries risk in
young children. These strategies will not only reduce the incidence
of dental caries and help maintain oral and overall health but also
alleviate the significant economic burden on families and society
at large.
Dental caries results from complex interactions between
the host
and microbial factors in the oral cavity. As a medium that reflects
both host and microbial dynamics, saliva plays a vital role in preserving
the equilibrium of the oral ecosystem, thus stands as a critical model
for investigating the pathogenesis of dental caries.
5
,
6
Furthermore, saliva-based testing presents advantages of noninvasiveness,
simplicity, high specificity, and high sensitivity, which especially
facilitate research studies on young children.
7
Numerous previous studies have elucidated the variation of salivary
microbiota in the development of dental caries. However, research
exploring the role of salivary microenvironment in ECC etiology is
still insufficient, especially the characteristics related to host
factors.
Previous studies have identified many caries-related
proteins in
saliva, including lysozyme, lactoferrin, peroxidases, agglutinins,
histidine, secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA), and immunoglobulins G
(IgG) and M (IgM), exerting potential functions of lubrication, digestion,
or antimicrobial activity in caries etiology.
8
−
10
Cross-sectional
studies by Jonas Almeida Rodrigues and Lidiany K A Rodrigues’
group investigated the salivary protein features that could distinguish
the ECC and caries-free oral conditions in 2–6 year-old children
and identified eight caries-related proteins (HAUS4, CAH1, IL36A,
IL36G, AIMP1, KLHL8, KLH13, and SAA1) together with three health-related
proteins (hemoglobin subunit gamma-1, gamma-2, and alpha).
11
,
12
Similarly, another cross-sectional study performed by Xiaoyan Ou’s
group also screened several ECC-related proteins, such as MK, histone
H4, TGFβ3, ZG16B, MUC20, and SMR-3B, and further proposed these
differentially expressed proteins as potential biomarkers for ECC
diagnosis.
13
Additionally, salivary metaproteomics
analysis carried out by Neeraj Shrivastava’s team revealed
differentially expressed proteins of both human and microbial origin,
demonstrating that salivary IgA was the top highest protein in the
healthy group, whereas human lysozyme was the top highest protein
in the ECC group.
14
Moreover, Zheng Shuguo’s
group applied MALDI-TOF MS for a longitudinal analysis of salivary
proteomic profiles throughout ECC progression and proposed protein
SMR-3B and mucin-7 to have potential to serve as candidate biomarkers
for dynamic surveillance of changes in high-risk status of ECC.
5
,
15
However, although these studies have identified several potential
protein biomarkers that are associated with caries risk, the predictive
accuracy of these potential biomarkers has not been validated through
new prospective cohorts. In addition, the depth of these proteomic
analyses remains inadequate, and the identification of only several
hundred proteins might constrain our understanding of the holistic
saliva function.
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry-based
proteomics
enables unbiased identification and quantification of proteins with
quantitative accuracy and high reproducibility.
16
Previous studies revealed its detection of the proteomics
variations that associated with various diseases in body fluids such
as cerebrospinal fluid and blood.
17
,
18
Compared with
previous protein detection methods, the application of DIA mass spectrometry-based
proteomics in saliva analysis will markedly enhance our knowledge
of the etiology and pathogenesis of caries.
In this study, we
monitored a prospective cohort of 3–4
year-old healthy children for 12 months, who either stayed caries-free
or developed caries. Deep quantitative proteomics analysis was conducted
to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying ECC etiology and
identify potential biomarkers for caries prediction. On this basis,
two protein biomarkers, keratin 3 (KRT3) and mucin 21 (MUC21), were
further validated through a new independent cohort. Through all these
attempts, we aim to facilitate future clinical application of precise
prevention and control of ECC, in order to ultimately reduce its incidence
and improve all children’s life quality.
2
Methods and Materials
2.1
Ethics Statement
The Institutional
Review Board of Peking University Hospital of Stomatology approved
the study design, protocol, and informed consent procedure (PKUSSIRB-202171207).
Written informed consents were received from parents or guardians
of all the participants prior to enrollment.
2.2
Study Design and Participants
This
study involved two prospective cohorts, one experimental cohort, and
one validation cohort.
2.2.1
Experimental Cohort
A total of
80 3–4 year-old children from three urban kindergartens in
Haidian District, Beijing, China, underwent routine oral examination
during July to September, 2022. Among them, 42 healthy caries-free
children were recruited and followed for 12 months. Oral examination
and saliva sampling were carried out at both enrollment (T0) and 12
months later (T12). The inclusion criteria are as follows: (1) 3–4
years old with complete deciduous dentition; (2) caries-free (no decayed,
missing, or filled teeth), teeth without enamel hypoplasia, chalky
spots, or other developmental defects; no salivary gland-related diseases;
(3) overall healthy, without systemic diseases or history of systemic
medication; maternal pregnancy history without abnormalities; and
(4) and no systemic use of antibiotics or topical fluoride application
within the previous one month. The exclusion criteria are (1) noncooperation
with sampling and (2) wearing orthodontic appliances during the follow-up
period. All the children included in this study shared the same food
menu and kept the same oral cleaning habits during the daytime when
they were in the kindergartens. Uniform oral health instructions were
given to parents before the recruitment, illustrating instructions
of teeth brushing and dental flossing.
19
2.2.2
Validation Cohort
The inclusion
and exclusion criteria were the same as those for the experimental
cohort. Seventy-five 3–4 year-old caries-free children were
recruited after oral examination in April to May, 2023. Nonstimulated
saliva was collected at recruitment. Another oral examination was
conducted to record their caries status at 12 months follow-up, with
no saliva collection.
2.3
Oral Examination and Unstimulated Saliva Collection
Oral examination of all of the participants was performed by one
experienced pediatric dentist under natural light. The examination
consistency was ensured by comparison with two other attending dentists
prior to the initiation of the study. The κ value for intraexaminer
agreement in the diagnosis of caries was 0.88. Caries status and the
dmft index (total number of the decayed, missing, or filled deciduous
teeth) were scored according to the World Health Organization caries
diagnostic criteria (fifth edition, 2013): caries lesions involving
the dentin, cavitated lesions, or softened areas in the enamel on
occlusal or smooth surfaces were considered as caries. No radiographs
were taken.
20
,
21
All the participants were
instructed to refrain from eating, brushing teeth, drinking water,
exercising, or chewing gum for 1 h and rinse mouth thoroughly with
water for approximately 10 min before sampling. Unstimulated saliva
was collected by the draining method for 5 min, which was conducted
during 9:00 to 10:00 a.m.
22
Essentially,
the children were instructed to tilt their heads slightly forward,
position their tongues against their palates, and let their saliva
flow naturally into a sterilized 15 mL centrifuge tube. Samples were
immediately put on ice and transferred to the laboratory within 2
h. Saliva was centrifuged at 500
g
for 10 min at 4
°C. The supernatant was collected and stored at −80 °C
until further analysis.
2.4
Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics Analysis
2.4.1
Sample Preparation and Peptide Fractions
All saliva samples from the experimental cohort were vortexed and
centrifuged (3000
g
for 10 min at 4 °C), and
the supernatant was transferred into polypropylene tubes. The amount
of protein was estimated by using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein
assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fifty micrograms (50 μg) of
saliva supernatant from each sample was precipitated by acetone; then
subjected to reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion desalt; and
dried completely by vacuum centrifugation.
Cohort-specific library
was generated by pooling of all the samples from the experimental
cohort. After the samples were prepared as peptides, 2μg of
peptides of each sample was taken and mixed. For spectral library
construction, approximately 140 μg of mixed peptide was fractionated
using a high-pH reversed-phase HPLC system (1290 Infinity, Agilent).
Briefly, the mixed peptides were dissolved in Buffer A (20 mM ammonia,
2% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 10.5) and loaded onto an Accucore C18 column
(2.1 × 150 mm, 2.6 μm particles; Thermo Fisher Scientific)
using 56 min linear gradient of 5–80% of Buffer B (20 mM ammonia,
98% ACN, pH 10.5) at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. Sixty fractions were
collected along with the liquid chromatography (LC) separation and
were concatenated into 20 fractions by combining fractions 1, 21,
41, and so on. Then, the pool fractions were dried completely by vacuum
centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in 10 μL of Milli-Q
water with 0.1% formic acid and then spiked with indexed retention
time (iRT) peptides to a final concentration of 1× for chromatographic
correction.
2.4.2
nLC-MS/MS Analysis
The nanoscale
liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS)
analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC instrument (Thermo
Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass
spectrometer. All samples were separated within 90 min on a reversed-phase
C18 column (25 cm × 75 μm, 1.7 μm, IonOpticks). The
elute gradient of B was linearly increased from 9% to 27% within 70
min, followed by an increase to 45% within 8 min and an increase to
95% within 5 min, and continued for another 7 min at a flow rate of
300 nL/min at 50 °C (mobile phases A: 0.1% formic acid in water;
mobile phases B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile).
The
mass spectrometer was operated in the positive mode using either data-dependent
acquisition (DDA) or data-independent acquisition (DIA) modes. DDA
mode: The samples were analyzed using a top 20 DDA (data-dependent
acquisition) method with the following settings: full mass spectrometry
1 (MS1) scans at
m
/
z
350–1200,
a resolution of 60,000, a target automatic gain control (AGC) value
of 3 × 10
6
, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms;
mass spectrometry 2 (MS2) scans with a resolution of 15,000, MS2 scan
range at 200–2000
m
/
z
, a
target AGC value of 5 × 10
5
, a maximum injection time
of 120 ms, fragmentation with an NCE of 30, 1.6
m
/
z
of isolation window, an ion selection threshold
of 6.7 × 10
4
, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. 400
ng of HeLa protein digest standard (Pierce) was run regularly. DIA
mode: The MS1 scan resolution was set to 60,000. The MS1 scan range
was 350–1200
m
/
z
, the AGC
target was 3 × 10
6
, and the maximum injection time
was 50 ms. Precursors were isolated with a dynamic isolation width
covering 350–1200
m
/
z
. Precursors
were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized
collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS2 scans were acquired by Orbitrap
at a resolution of 30,000. The maximum injection time was set to auto,
and the AGC target was set to 1 × 10
6
.
2.4.3
Generation of Spectral Libraries and DIA
Data Analysis
Spectral libraries were generated with Spectronaut
version 16.0 (Biognosys) against a UNIPROT human database (only reviewed
entries). DIA files were processed in the default mode.
2.4.4
Statistical Analysis
The OmicsBean
software was used for data analysis, including data imputation, normalization,
and principal component analysis (PCA). Genefilter was used in the
calculation of the fold-change values of proteins. A fold change >2
or <0.5 were set for differential expression protein filtration.
Mfuzzplot implemented in Omicsbean was used to detect different subclustering
models of gene expression among groups. R v.3.6.326 was used to implement
Fisher’s exact test.
23
Kyoto encyclopedia
of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway database (
https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.html
) were applied for pathway enrichment analysis. Ggplot2 packages
and Cytoscape v.3.5.1 implemented in the Omicsbean workbench were
used to achieve a Venn diagram, heatmap, and network visualization.
2.5
Validation of Salivary Protein Biomarkers
for Predicting Dental Caries
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) method was employed to validate the accuracy of the
protein biomarker predictions in both the experimental and validation
cohorts. Saliva samples were centrifuged at 500
g
at
4 °C, and the supernatant was collected. The ELISA assay was
performed according to the instructions provided with the ELISA kit
(Jiangsu enzyme-free). First, samples and standards were incubated
at 37 °C for 30 min, and then the concentrated solution was thoroughly
washed after dilution. The solution underwent enzyme treatment, incubation,
washing, and color development, followed by the addition of a stop
solution to terminate the reaction. Absorbance was measured at 450
nm within 15 min after adding the stop solution using an enzyme label
(Biotech, America), and a standard curve was generated to calculate
the content of standards in each sample. The independent sample
t
-test was used to analyze the difference in protein levels
of content between the two groups at baseline.
3
Results
3.1
Salivary Proteomics Data Effectively Distinguished
Different Caries States
In the experiment cohort, all 42
participants were caries-free at enrollment. By the 12 month follow-up,
4 children dropped out due to personal reasons, 17 of the remaining
children remained caries-free (CF group), and the other 21 children
developed caries (CA group) (
Figure
1
a). Among the 17 caries-free children, 6 were subjected
to only oral examinations at the 12 month follow-up, with no saliva
samples collected simultaneously due to the occurrence of respiratory
infections at that time. No significant differences were detected
in age or gender between the two groups. The average number of decayed
teeth in the CA group was 3.57 at the end of the observation (Supporting
Information
Table S1
). The saliva samples
from the two time points were processed by DIA mass spectrometry.
Figure 1
Quantitative
proteomics analysis of saliva in the cohort study.
(a) Workflow diagram of this cohort study, which aimed at both mechanism
dissection and biomarker identification. (b) Abundance distribution
of the salivary proteins that are obtained from quantitative proteomics
analysis. (c) Distribution plot of the coefficients of variation (CV)
values. (d) Distribution plot of data integrity. (e) Subcellular distribution
of the quantified proteins. (f) Principal component analysis of the
salivary proteome in the cohort. CF12 group: children who remained
caries-free at 12 months. CF0 group: CF children at baseline. CA12
group: children detected with active caries at 12 months. CA0 group:
CA children at baseline.
A total of 2873 proteins were identified, with
a relative abundance
spanning over 8 orders of magnitude (
Figure
1
b), and the median coefficient of variation
(CV) for quality control was 0.25 (
Figure
1
c). Over 73% (2114/2873) of the quantified
proteins were identified in more than 75% of the samples, demonstrating
high stability and reproducibility of the proteomics analysis (
Figure
1
d). These proteins
predominantly belong to the category of membrane-bound organelles,
cytoplasmic parts, vesicles, and extracellular organelles (
Figure
1
e). PCA indicated
that the proteomic data effectively differentiated the caries children
(CA12) from the caries-free children (CF12) at 12 month follow-up
as well as their respective baselines CA0 and CF0 (
Figure
1
f).
3.2
Longitudinal Variation of Salivary Proteome
Elucidated the Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Childhood Caries Occurrence
Saliva samples that were collected from a 12 month follow-up were
compared to their baseline to identify protein features that are relevant
to caries pathogenesis. The caries group exhibited 221 differentially
expressed proteins (DEPs), including 169 upregulated and 52 downregulated
proteins. Correspondingly, 58 upregulated and 86 downregulated proteins
were defined at 12 months in the caries-free group, possibly due to
natural growth or development. A total of 65 DEPs were common across
the CA12 vs CA0 and CF12 vs CF0 comparisons, including 24 proteins
demonstrating opposite trends and the other 41 DEPs demonstrating
consistent trends (
Figure
2
a,b and Supporting Information
Table S2
). Furthermore, after excluding these 41 consistent DEPs from the
previous 221 DEPs, a total of 180 DEPs were defined as proteins that
accurately reflect the changes in protein composition associated with
caries development in the cohort, which were enriched in pathways
including the immune system, infection processes, secretion mechanisms,
and antifolate resistance (
Figure
2
c). It is worth mentioning that some of the caries-associated
proteins had been previously identified through genomewide association
studies (GWAS), such as beta-defensin 1 (DEFB1) and proline-rich phosphoprotein
1 (PRH1). Additionally, some of the caries-associated proteins were
found associated with other oral diseases, including protein complement
c1q subcomponent subunit A (C1QA) and intercellular adhesion molecule
2 (ICAM2) with periodontal disease, as well as protein ICAM2 and proto-oncogene
tyrosine-protein kinase src (SRC) with oral tumors and cancers (
Figure
2
c,d).
24
−
29
Specifically, some proteins increased significantly with the onset
of caries, yet remained unchanged in the noncaries group, such as
protein histatin-1 (HTN1) and matrix metalloproteinase-14 (MMP14)
(
Figure
2
d).
Figure 2
Paired analysis
of the longitudinal proteome variation reveals
characteristics of the saliva microenvironment during childhood caries
occurrence. (a) The volcano plot shows the differentially expressed
proteins (DEPs) in the CA and CF groups. (b) The Venn diagram illustrates
the differential proteins between the CA and CF cohorts. (c) The KEGG
signaling pathways enriched with differential proteins before and
after caries development in the longitudinal cohort. (d) The paired
sample plots of the CA group and CF group indicate the changes in
protein expression at baseline and 12 months.
3.3
Cross-Sectional Analysis Characterized the
Saliva Microenvironment between Various Caries Conditions
Cross-sectional comparison conducted on caries (CA12) and caries-free
individuals (CF12) at 12 months revealed 161 DEPs, comprising 106
upregulated and 55 downregulated proteins (
Figure
3
a and Supplemental
Table S3
). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis identified that the caries-associated
signaling pathways included metabolism, infection, and matrix degeneration
(
Figure
3
b,c and Supporting
Information
Table S4
). Specifically, there
was a significant increase in the number of proteins linked to infection
(
Figure
3
d). Proteins
such as complement receptor type 1 (CR1), DEFB1, and low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein (LRP1) were notably elevated in caries children.
To further clarify the proteins that are associated with caries severity,
the CA12 group was divided into two subgroups based on the number
of decayed teeth: CA12-M (dt < 4) and CA12-S (dt ≥ 4); proteins
keratin 6A (KRT6A), tlr4 interactor with leucine-rich repeats (TRIL),
high-affinity immunoglobulin alpha and immunoglobulin mu Fc receptor
(FCAMR), and
c
-
x
-c motif chemokine
17 (CXCL17) were confirmed as their significant alteration along with
the severity of caries (
Figure
3
e).
Figure 3
Cross-sectional analysis characterized the saliva microenvironment
between various caries conditions. (a) The volcano plot illustrates
DEPs between the CA and CF groups at 12 months. (b). Bubble plot displays
the KEGG signaling pathways corresponding to the DEPs. (c) The Sankey
diagram and heatmap demonstrate the differential signaling pathways
that may be associated with caries. (d) The protein–protein
interaction (PPI) diagram shows protein interaction in the enriched
KEGG pathway. (e) Scatter diagram shows the changing trends of key
proteins in the enriched KEGG pathway.
3.4
Identification and Validation of Molecular
Biomarkers Predicting Caries Occurrence
In the experimental
cohort, saliva samples collected at recruitment (T0) were actually
categorized according to the clinical outcomes at the 12 month follow-up.
The participants were all caries-free at enrollment. Therefore, proteomes
of CA0 and CF0 were analyzed to identify potential biomarkers that
are capable of predicting caries occurrence before the disease onset
so as to screen out individuals with high caries risk beforehand and
thus enable accurate prevention. Since the initial cross-sectional
comparison faced the challenge of excessive candidates, the selection
analysis of biomarkers was refined as follows to pinpoint the most
effective biomarkers for further validation. First, proteins with
higher levels in CA0 compared to CF0 were selected since biomarker
screening commonly prioritize upregulated proteins (
Figure
4
a and Supporting Information
Table S5
). Based on a fuzzy c-means algorithm,
these DEPs were clustered into six types. DEPs that were also elevated
at a 12 month follow-up (CA12) were particularly focused (cluster
3 in
Figure
4
b). The
candidate biomarkers were further screened to meet a data completeness
criterion of over 70% (proteins that could be identified in more than
70% of all the samples). Proteins highly correlated with caries severity
were prioritized (
Figure
4
c). Consequently, two protein biomarkers, KRT3 and MUC21,
were selected for validation by the ELISA method. At baseline, both
the two biomarkers exhibited significantly higher levels in the caries
group compared to the caries-free group (
Figure
4
d). The area under the curve (AUC) value
was 1 for KRT3 and 0.871 for MUC21 independently, while the AUC value
for the combination of these two biomarkers was 1 (
Figure
4
e).
Figure 4
Screening and validation
of the caries-predictive biomarkers. (a)
The volcano plot illustrates DEPs between the CA and CF groups at
baseline (FC > 2,
p
< 0.05). (b) The cluster
plot
shows change trends of the DEPs in the four illustrated groups. (c)
The plot illustrates the expression levels of proteins MUC21 and KRT3
in different subgroups. (d) The scatter plot displays the levels of
specific proteins that are detected by ELISA at baseline in the experimental
cohort. Each point represents the data of one child. Data are presented
as mean ± SD, two-tailed
t
-test. (e) The ROC
curve shows the predictive diagnostic ability of KRT3 and MUC21 in
the experimental cohort. (f) The scatter plot displays the levels
of specific proteins that are detected by ELISA at baseline in the
validation cohort. Each point represents the data of one child. Data
are presented as mean ± SD, two-tailed
t
-test.
(g) The ROC curve shows the predictive diagnostic ability of KRT3
and MUC21 in the validation cohort.
In order to validate the caries prediction accuracy
for these two
protein biomarkers, we established a distinguished validation cohort
of 75 3–4 year-old children, of whom 37 children developed
dental caries at 12 month follow-up. ELISA of proteins MUC21 and KRT3
based on the baseline samples showed consistent content trends with
those in the experimental cohort (
Figure
4
f). In the validation cohort, the AUC value
was 0.901 for KRT3, 0.724 for MUC21, and 0.926 for the combination
of both biomarkers (
Figure
4
g). This indicates that using protein KRT3 and MUC21 as biomarkers
for ECC prediction yields a very high accuracy.
4
Discussion
We conducted DIA mass spectrometry
on salivary samples from a prospective
cohort of healthy children, of whom 55% developed caries by the end
of observation. A total of 2873 proteins were identified, illustrating
the involvement of immune response, dental structure repair and regeneration,
and interactions with microorganisms in caries pathogenesis. In addition,
we identified the salivary features in caries-susceptible children
before caries development and established a protein panel of KRT3
and MUC21 for early screening. This study highlights the complexity
of the salivary microenvironment and provides a prognostic tool for
early prediction of caries risk in young children.
Saliva comprises
proteins that are synthesized in the salivary
glands or derived from gingival crevicular fluid, serum transudate,
epithelial cells, leukocytes, and microorganisms.
30
As part of the endocrine system, many constituents enter
saliva from blood via passive diffusion or active transport.
31
Comprehensive analysis of the salivary contents
is essential for understanding disease states and identifying potential
biomarkers. Using DIA mass spectrometry, our study quantified 2873
proteins from 200 μL of saliva in young children, of which 73%
(2114/2873) proteins exhibited high reproducibility and stability.
This is one of the most in-depth profiles of the salivary proteome
in a clinical cohort study to date.
32
Our
findings expanded the understanding of saliva’s role beyond
lubrication, buffering, digestion, and antimicrobial protection to
a more complex network of oral immune and metabolic microenvironments.
This study serves as a valuable resource for further mechanistic studies
of caries in young children and could facilitate the discovery of
biomarkers or elucidate mechanisms for other diseases through salivary
analysis.
ECC is a dental hard tissue disease that occurs in
the oral microenvironment.
Its etiology can be explained by interactions among the salivary microenvironment
and cariogenic microorganisms under the genetic background.
33
The complement system is the main core of innate
immunity and is considered to be the first line of defense against
pathogens.
34
One meta-analysis has shown
that the biological process of the lectin pathway of complement activation
had the highest strength of association with ECC, and polymorphisms
of genes regulating the lectin pathway of complement activation could
modify the susceptibility to ECC.
35
In
our study, the complement system may indeed be involved in one of
the immune responses in the pathogenesis of caries. Several KEGG pathways
that were enriched in the CA group contained molecules from the complement
system. Correspondingly, multiple complement molecules were found
to be significantly elevated in caries status, regardless of longitudinal
comparison or cross-sectional comparison at 12 months. These molecules
included CR1, complement receptor type 2 (CR2), and c4b-binding protein
alpha chain (C4BPA), which are all present in the classical pathway
of complement system activation. One recent study has shown that the
intestinal complement system operates as an independent and autonomous
entity, allowing for precise modulation of responses toward commensals
and pathogens, and also plays an important role in the pathogenesis
of infectious diarrhea.
36
Accordingly,
the oral cavity is the second largest microbial reservoir in the human
body and the site of many local infectious diseases (such as caries);
it is worth further investigating the role of the complement system
in the pathogenesis of these oral diseases.
Another prominent
category of DEPs, such as matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP2), MMP14, HTN1, and PRH1, pertains to proteins that participate
in dental structure formation, enamel repair, and regeneration, as
well as microbial adhesion. MMP-2 is a main gelatinase that concentrated
in the odontoblasts in deep dentine and the dentinoenamel junction.
37
Previous research has reported increased MMP2
levels in early caries and speculated that it may be actively secreted
by odontoblasts in response to a carious insult. This secretion could
potentially lead to calcification of regions affected by the carious
process. On the contrary, our study revealed decreased MMP2 level
in unstimulated saliva with caries status (
Figure
3
c), suggesting the possibility that MMP2
may also be involved in metabolic or immune responses in the salivary
microenvironment during caries occurrence.
33
,
38
Basic proline-rich proteins (PRPs) are involved in innate and adaptive
immunity and enamel formation. They are considered as protective factors
against caries as it can modulate the adhesion of
Streptococcus
mutans
and provide a barrier against bacterial acids.
39
,
40
It has been reported that genetic polymorphisms in proline-rich
phosphoprotein 1 (PRH1) and proline-rich phosphoprotein 2 (PRH2) might
imply susceptibility to ECC, with differential gene expression contributing
to individual variations in caries susceptibility.
41
Our study identified that protein salivary acidic PRH1
was upregulated in caries children, which is a cross-validation of
previous reports.
It is important to note that this study investigated
the saliva
proteome of children who were susceptible to caries before any actual
caries lesions take place. Comparative analysis between CA0 and CF0
demonstrated changes in proteins related to caries susceptibility
as long as 12 months before disease onset. Based on both the experimental
cohort and validation cohort, we developed a prediction panel of proteins
KRT3 and MUC21 for the early prediction of ECC.
KRT3 belongs
to the intermediate filament family. It is mainly
secreted by salivary glands and is known to have interactions with
33 proteins, most of which are physical associations with other keratins.
It has been reported to be specifically expressed in corneal epithelial
cells, and mutations of KRT3 are associated with Meesmann’s
corneal dystrophy.
42
Intriguingly, this
study found that another type of keratin, keratin 6 (KRT6), exhibited
a significantly increased level in saliva, along with the severity
of caries. KRT6, as another type II cytokeratin, is expressed in epithelia
that withstand particularly high levels of mechanical strain, including
oral epithelial cells. It has been reported that the KRT6 protein
can interact with enamel matrix proteins such as amelogenin and tuftelin
and play a crucial role in the enamel rod sheath.
43
Mutations in the KRT6A gene may impair the stability of
the organic structural component of mature enamel and exhibit structural
enamel defects, resulting in increased susceptibility to caries.
44
However, neither the interactions between KRT3
and KRT6 in humans nor the association of KRT3 with dental caries
has been reported. As a secretory protein of salivary glands, we speculate
that KRT3 may act as a covariate factor in the occurrence of caries
by indirectly affecting the salivary microenvironment through interactions
with other proteins.
MUC21, also known as epiglycanin, is a
high-molecular-weight glycoprotein
with transmembrane mucin properties.
45
Membrane-bound
mucins are retained in the cell membrane and act as cell surface receptors
for various signal transduction pathways.
46
MUC21 is also involved in the defense against pathogenic microbial
infections. MUC21 gene was reported to be one of the most upregulated
genes in gingival wound healing and the most upregulated mucin gene
in gingival epithelial cells following infection with the protozoan
parasite
Entamoeba gingivalis
.
47
,
48
However, previous studies have been inconclusive about the association
between salivary mucins and ECC.
49
We reported
that MUC21 may serve as a predictive biomarker for ECC. Further research
is warranted to explore the functional mechanisms of its involvement
in the development of dental caries, particularly its interactions
with oral microorganisms.
Our previous longitudinal study of
children at the same age showed
that shift in the composition and structure of the oral microbiota
had occurred as early as 6 months before the detection of caries.
19
In this study, saliva protein KRT3 and MUC21
demonstrated highly accurate predictions regarding the incidence of
caries as long as 12 months before caries onset, regardless of their
use in isolation or in combination (accuracy rates ranging from 87.1%
to 100% in the experimental cohort and from 72.4% to 92.6% in the
independent validation cohort). The predictive accuracy is higher
than that of previous prediction models based on cariogenic bacteria
selected from the oral microbiome.
50
,
51
Notably, compared
to prediction through high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatics
analysis of oral microbiome, protein biomarker measurement based on
the ELISA method, which is a regular molecular biological test, offers
a more convenient, rapid, and cost-effective way for caries risk prediction
in young children. This predictive method exhibits a very reliable
prospect of clinical application, which enables more precise predictive
and preventive measures for dental caries at the clinical level, thus
making our research of great practical significance.
In conclusion,
our research provides a deep understanding of the
complex interplay within salivary proteomics in ECC. Protein features
relevant to caries pathogenesis were investigated through identification
of the differentially expressed proteins both longitudinally and cross-sectionally.
These proteins illustrated involvement of immune response, dental
structure repair, and regeneration, as well as interactions with microorganisms
during caries pathogenesis. By developing a targeted protein panel
of KRT3 and MUC21 for early caries prediction, we contribute to generating
children’s health care strategies proactively and preventively.
The study’s limitations include a small sample size and
potential biases due to participant loss over the 12 month follow-up.
The participants in the existing experimental and validation cohorts
all originated from the resident population of Beijing, China. Considering
the differences in characteristics among diverse populations and ethnicities,
further validation through larger, multicenter studies with independent
cohorts of a broader range of individuals should be applied to enhance
the robustness and applicability of the findings. Dental caries is
a multifactorial disease, with host characteristics accounting for
only part of its etiology. Factors such as dietary habits and oral
hygiene practice also influence caries incidence. Future research
should incorporate lifestyle and dietary covariates into caries risk
prediction models to enhance precision and reliability, constructing
a system that more accurately reflects clinical realities.