Introduction
The coding genes annotated in the Human Genome Project account for ∼2.5% of the human genome, whereas the remaining gene products are considered non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) (
1
). However, several traditional non-coding transcripts, such as long non-coding RNAs and circular RNAs (circRNAs), have been shown to serve as templates that can be translated into new proteins, presenting an opportunity to investigate understudied proteins (
2–4
).
With the development of mass spectrometry (MS) technology and the identification of ribosome-binding sites on RNA through ribosome profiling (
5
,
6
), large-scale proteomics has evolved to include the identification of previously unknown proteins in databases (
7
). Depending on the source, understudied proteins can be generated by genomic mutations, alternative splicing or ncRNA (
8
). Notably, translatable circRNAs reportedly enhance the “ghost proteome” (
9
). CircRNAs have been proposed to function in complex diseases by competing with microRNAs or RNA-binding proteins (
10–12
). Nonetheless, over the recent years, cap-independent mechanisms have allowed researchers to explore proteins translated from circRNAs that are not well studied (
13–15
).
Various algorithms and tools have been designed to preliminarily screen translatable circRNAs. When this technology was in its infancy, researchers primarily focused on the use of open reading frame (ORF) annotation methods to determine the coding potential of circRNAs (
16
). Most circRNAs have ORFs, but only a fraction of them have been detected via ribosome profiling or MS. Using ribosome profiling, the mainstream technique for identifying translatable circRNAs, involves measuring their association with ribosomes. However, this approach has two main drawbacks. On the one hand, algorithms based on intrinsic RNA sequence features lack circRNA specificity. Furthermore, ribosome profiling is expensive and requires technical sophistication. Moreover, MS, the gold standard for identifying translatable RNA, is limited by imprecise peptide libraries and requires further promotion.
To address the current translatable circRNA prediction dilemma, we propose CICADA (“circRNA-coding capability and product detection algorithm”). This algorithm uses a machine learning model to distinguish circRNA-coding capability based on sequence-intrinsic features while accounting for circRNA specificity. We then evaluated the performance of CICADA and linear RNA coding potential assessment tools (CPC2, CPAT, and CNCI), as well as other circRNA-coding potential calculators based on ribosome profiles (CircPro and CircCode). Additionally, CICADA provided a list of circRNA-encoded proteins that can be used as a peptide library for MS searches to identify circRNA-encoded proteins. As a proof of concept, we employed matched or unmatched MS data with self-testing and public data to construct circRNA translation profiles for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and pan-cancer tissues, respectively. Our finding further validated the reliability and flexibility of CICADA for translatable circRNA identification.
Materials and methods
Dataset description
For the training sets, positive translatable circRNAs with ribosomal or MS evidence were retrieved from the TransCirc database (
Supplementary Table S1
), whereas negative untranslatable introns were obtained from the Ensembl database (GRCh38, v101) after data preprocessing (
Supplementary methods
). For testing set one, experimentally verified, positive translatable circRNAs were collected from the riboCIRC and cncRNAdb databases and through literature mining (
Supplementary Table S2
), whereas introns acquired randomly, but not in the training set, were regarded as negative. For the testing set, two publicly available paired RNA-seq and ribo-seq datasets of the same cell lines, including A549 and MCF7, were downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, whereas the MS dataset for assessment was PXD002395 from the Proteomics IDEntifications database (
Supplementary Table S3
). For the circRNA translation profile of ESCC, we conducted circRNA-seq and matched MS in 10 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and two esophageal epithelial cell lines (
Supplementary Table S4
). For the circRNA translation profile of pancreatic tissue from unmatched datasets, we collected tissue-specific circRNA profiles from the circNet database and MS data from the Proteomic Data Commons (PDC) of the National Cancer Institute, iProX and ProteomeX changes (
Supplementary Table S5
).
Highest potential coding region prediction
To predict the highest potential coding region (HPCR) in all six reading frames of circRNA transcripts, we improved CNCI by integrating the intrinsic characteristics of the circRNAs. The main process is as follows. First, the usage frequency of the adjoining nucleotide triplet (ANT) in the coding region of the circRNA and non-coding intron sequence was calculated and a 64 × 64 ANT score matrix was constructed by dividing the circRNA-ORF values by those of the intron (
Supplementary Figure S1
). We subsequently verified that the smallest sample size of the positive training set was 2874 and that of the negative training set was 2196 (
Supplementary Figure S2a
). A sliding window of 60 nt was used to scan each transcript six times, simulating six reading frames in two sequences while accounting for the rolling of the circRNAs. Six discrete numerical arrays consisting of a sequence score (S-score) for each reading frame type were generated (
Supplementary Figure S2b
). Finally, we applied a dynamic programming technique, namely the maximum interval sum, to identify the largest sum values in the six candidate HPCR regions from the six reading frames of each transcript (
Supplementary Figure S2c
and
Supplementary Figure S2d
). Next, the HPCR of the transcripts that were significantly longer and had a higher quality percentage relative to the other five candidates were derived for subsequent feature extraction. To estimate the quality of the HPCR results, we compared the HPCRs of all human protein-coding transcripts with the corresponding true coding sequences (CDSs) and evaluated the distribution of the degree of overlap (
Supplementary Figure S2e
and
Supplementary Figure S2f
).
Feature selection and classification model construction
To distinguish protein-coding circRNA sequences from non-CDSs, we retrieved a list of candidate intrinsic features derived from transcripts or HPCR sequences based on the literature. This compilation notably encompasses features associated with the circRNA translation mechanism. The following properties were selected: (1) sequence properties (HPCR length and S-score), HPCR coverage, and transcript Fickett score (four variables); (2) conservation properties (one variable); (3) mechanism properties that include the existence or number of IRES elements and m6A modification sites (two variables;
Supplementary Table S6
). All these features were compared between protein-coding circRNA sequences and non-CDSs, and we retained the discriminative features for feature detection (
Supplementary Figure S3a
). We took the “sequence property” as the core feature (
Supplementary Figure S3b
). Other features were added sequentially to obtain the best internal 10-fold cross-validation results (
Supplementary Figure S3c
).
For each feature vector from the positive and negative training sets, we calculated the statistical score and constructed a data matrix that was incorporated into the machine learning procedure for model construction. We used random forest (RF) approaches to train the classification models separately with the default parameter settings. A classification model for coding circRNA identification was constructed, and the key formulas are displayed in
Supplementary Figure S4
. To quantify the classification performance, in alignment with many other methods in previous publications (
17
,
18
), we used the testing sets to calculate the following metrics: sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, false-positive rate, positive predictive value and F score (
19
).
CircRNA-encoded product prediction
The circRNA-encoded product(circProt) prediction were predicted based on HPCR. Considering the distinctive feature of circRNAs where the head and tail are joined, and the occurrence of rolling circle translation in sequences with lengths that are non-multiples of three nucleotides, we categorised all circRNAs into four groups based on the position of HPCR relative to the junction site and the sequence length, specifically whether the number of amino acids was a multiple of three. We then replicated the circRNA sequences three, four, seven and eight times to create concatenated sequences for each category accordingly. The ‘NTG’ codon was considered the start codon as previously described (
20
), and the ‘TAA’/‘TGA’/‘TAG’ codons were considered the stop codons. The ‘point stop codon’ was found between the first HPCR start site and the second HPCR start site or between the first HPCR start site and the fourth HPCR start site; the start codon was found between the last ‘stop codon’ (the orange dot) and the second or fourth HPCR stop site. Finally, stop codons were found between the second and third HPCR start sites and between the fourth and eighth HPCR start sites. We excluded sequences with stop codons before the start codon. When both the start and stop codons were present, classical ORFs were identified as circProts; when either the start or stop codon was absent, ORF-HPCRs were identified as circProts; when both the start and stop codons were absent, HPCRs were identified as circProts (Figure
2
).
Cell culture
ESCC cell lines (KYSE-30, KYSE-140, KYSE-150, KYSE-180, KYSE-510, KYSE-200, TE-1, TE-10, COLO 680 N and EC8712) and esophageal epithelial cell lines (NE2-hTERT and NE3-E6E7-hTERT) were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 mg/mL) and streptomycin (100 mg/mL). All cells were maintained under a humidified 5% CO
2
atmosphere at 37°C, were isolated by the short tandem repeat (STR) multiplex system, and tested for mycoplasma contamination before high-throughput analysis.
CircRNA identification by circRNA sequencing
We performed circRNA sequencing as described in the
Supplementary methods
. The quality of the raw reads was evaluated, and adapter sequences or low-quality bases were filtered using fastp (v0.23.2). We used the psirc method (
21
) to identify transcribed circRNAs, infer potential circular isoforms and assemble full-length sequences. The expression level of each circRNA was determined using Psirc-Quant to calculate the circRNA TPM-mapped reads. We applied edgeR and DESeq2 for differential gene analysis and took the intersection of the results from both. The logFC cutoff was determined by averaging the absolute log2 fold changes and then adding two standard deviations to this mean.
CircRNA-encoded product identification by MS
We used the open search engine pFind (v3.1.5) (
22
,
23
) to search for raw data in a combined database containing all UniProt human proteins and circRNA-encoded proteins predicted by CICADA or ORFfinder. For parameter settings of both label-free (LF) and TMT 11-plex labelled samples, a database search was carried out with Trypsin KR_C and Full-Specific up to three missed cleavages, allowing only common modifications (cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications); the results were filtered at the spectra or peptides level with FDR ≤ 1% (peptides level), peptide mass between 600 and 10000, peptide length between 6 and 100, while the results were filtered at the protein level with FDR ≤ 1% and number of peptides ≥ 1%. No action was taken to set the quantification parameters. The ‘pFind.protein’ file was used to screen the identified proteins, with a Q value ≤ 0.01, removing the ‘REV_’ labelled proteins and ‘SubSet’ proteins.
Results
An overview of CICADA
Using CICADA, our goal was to computationally distinguish translatable circRNAs based on their sequences (Figure
1
). For model construction, we first derived the HPCRs from the training datasets using a sliding window based on the ANT matrix. We chose the optimal HPCR using a dynamic programming algorithm. The sequence, conservation, structure and mechanism properties of the optimal HPCR or transcript were subsequently extracted from the positive and negative sets and incorporated into an RF model for training. Once the training was completed for CICADA, we could predict the coding potential of the circRNAs, specifically or in batches. Generally, CICADA uses full-length circRNA sequences as inputs and outputs binary results for circRNAs with or without coding potential. Next, we used an innovative approach to identify potential circProts by HPCR (Figure
2
). Based on supporting evidence from translatomics or proteomics, high throughput, reliable circRNA-encoded products can be acquired. Moreover, we compared the performance of the circRNA-coding potential prediction with that of other algorithms for both linear RNA coding potential prediction and circRNA-coding potential prediction based on ribo-seq data. CICADA and ORFfinder were also compared to predict circRNA-encoded products. All the results demonstrate the high performance of CICADA. Thus far, we have devised a framework to investigate the translational capacity of circRNAs and their potential circRNA-encoded products.
Figure 1.
Overview of the CICADA workflow. Input and output: CICADA takes one or more circRNA full-length sequences as input and generates output that include circRNA-coding potential, products and other details. In the modelling phase, we built an ATN matrix, pinpointed HPCRs with a sliding window and dynamic programming, and used machine learning to predict circRNA coding potential based on features from HPCR or full-length sequences. In the performance phase, we compared CICADA with other algorithms for both linear RNA coding potential prediction and circRNA-coding potential prediction based on ribo-seq data, as well as ORFfinder for their ability to predict circRNA-encoded products. In the application phase, we utilised both matched and unmatched circRNA-seq and proteomic data to construct cancer circRNA translation profiles, identifying potentially functional translatable circRNAs and their coding products.
Figure 2.
Strategies for identifying circRNA-encoded protein products from the HPCR of circRNAs. According to the HPCR position (HPCR spanning the junction site or not) and sequence length (the number of amino acids was a multiple of three or not), the circRNAs were divided into four categories, and the circRNA sequence was repeated three, four, seven and eight times to generate a concatemer sequence. The final circProts were composed of classical ORFs, ORF-HPCRs and HPCRs.
Comparison of performance in assessing coding potential
To evaluate the performance of CICADA, we compared the software with other pipelines using two test sets (Figure
3A
). The test set comprised 193 experimentally verified translatable circRNAs and 430 introns. CPC2 and CPAT, widely used tools for assessing the coding potential of linear transcripts, were employed to evaluate the protein-coding potential of circRNAs in circPro and circBank, respectively. Moreover, CNCI, designed primarily for linear transcripts, served as the baseline version of our software. The results indicate that CICADA achieved the highest accuracy and lowest error rate among the compared methods. CPAT exhibited the highest sensitivity and recall but the lowest specificity and precision. In contrast, CNCI demonstrated the highest specificity and precision but lower sensitivity and recall. Notably, CICADA outperformed CPAT, CPC2 and CNCI in terms of the F1 score, geometric mean (GM), and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC;
Supplementary Figure S5
). Additionally, CICADA exhibited superior performance compared with the other three methods based on the confusion matrix (Figure
3B
). The predictive performance of the nomograms was evaluated using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auROC). CICADA demonstrated excellent performance, with an auROC of 0.951, while CPAT (auROC: 0.918) showed slightly compromised sensitivity compared to that of CICADA but still outperformed CNCI and CPC2 (Figure
3C
). Moreover, CICADA showed superior performance in terms of the area under the precision-recall curve (auPR), with an auPR of 0.865 (Figure
3D
). In Figure
3E
, the gain chart illustrates that, using CPC2, the top two deciles captured approximately 38% of the gain value (true positive rate, TPR), while the other three models captured approximately 60% of the TPR. The lift chart shows that the percentage of positive predictions (RPPs) in the top 10% of the deciles by CICADA were three times more likely to be true positives than expected, while the other three models performed slightly worse.
Figure 3.
Evaluating CICADA prediction performance.
A
Representation of the comparison process.
B
The confusion matrix of the four methods on testing set one is presented. The upper left represents the true positive cases, the upper right represents the false-positive cases, the lower left represents the false negative cases, and the lower right represents the true negative cases.
C
The prediction performance was evaluated using the auROC. CICADA demonstrated superior performance, with an auROC of 0.951.
D
The prediction performance was evaluated using the precision-recall (P-R) curve. CICADA exhibited superior performance, with an auPR of 0.865.
E
The prediction performance was assessed using lift and gain charts. All the algorithms were compared to a random baseline where two deciles captured only 20% of the true positive rate (TPR) in the gain chart while they were compared the RPPs in the top 10% of the deciles in the lift chart.
F
The prediction performance of CICADA , circCode and circPro were compared on testing set two. The lightest color represents the total number of identified circRNAs, a slightly darker color represents the number of translatable circRNAs predicted by each method, and the darkest color represents the number of circRNAs supported by MS evidence.
To further assess the performance of CICADA, we compared it with two other pipelines that rely on ribosome-profiling data. This comparison was conducted using testing set two, which consisted of matched RNA-seq and ribosome-profiling data (Figure
3A
). CircPro requires the matching of RNA-seq and ribo-seq data for each sample, CircCode relies solely on ribo-seq data, and CICADA requires only RNA-seq data. To ensure a fair comparison, we employed CircRNA Identifier 2 (CIRI2) to detect circRNAs de novo from RNA sequencing reads in each sample, following the approach presented in Module 1 of CircPro. Subsequently, three methods were used to identify translatable circRNAs and circRNA-encoded products. As demonstrated by the results, the circRNA-encoded products predicted by CICADA, supported by MS evidence, were comparable to those generated by the other two methods (Figure
3F
). In conclusion, CICADA is a cost-effective algorithm for predicting circRNA-encoded products.
Discovery of circRNA-encoded products in esophageal cell lines
In addition to assessing the coding potential of circRNAs, CICADA can predict potential circRNA-encoded products, referred to as circProts. Initially, we employed psirc to identify circRNAs in 12 esophageal cell lines. Consistent with previous observations (
15
,
16
), our findings suggest that exons from the 5' end of pre-mRNAs are more common in circRNAs than in other circRNAs, indicating the potential of circRNAs to encode truncated N-terminal isoforms of their host genes. In contrast to the findings of prior studies (
15
,
16
), our analysis revealed a slightly lower proportion of circRNA exons originating from CDS region (54.6%), while a greater percentage of circRNA exons covered the 5'-UTR and coding region, as well as the coding and 3'-UTR regions (22.6% and 10.3%, respectively; Figure
4A
).
Figure 4.
Identification of circRNA-encoded products in esophageal cell lines.
A
The histogram represents the number of the first circRNA exons in their respective host genes, while the inserted pie chart depicts the percentage of circRNAs overlapping with different mRNA regions.
B
Length distribution of circRNA-encoded products predicted by CICADA and ORFfinder, comparing to known UniProt datasets.
C
Proteomic evidence supporting translatable circRNAs and their products predicted by CICADA and ORFfinder. We used LF and TMT 11-plex labelled samples.
D
Schematic of the CICADA prediction process for matched circRNA-seq and proteomic data. The left inverted triangle illustrates the sequential application of computational filters to identify translatable circRNAs, with the number of circRNAs passing through each filter indicated. The right pie charts show the proportions of different circRNA-encoded products in each corresponding layer.
E
Survey of circRNA-encoded products predicted by CICADA. On the left side, from top to bottom, we observe HPCR, predicted protein products and proteomic evidence-supported circRNA-encoded products. On the right side, the top represents circRNAs that are translated in a rolling-circle fashion, while the middle represents circRNAs that are translated into proteins without crossing the circRNA junction site or rolling; the bottom represents circRNAs that are translated into proteins, crossing the circRNA junction site but not rolling.
F
Relationships between the expression levels of circRNAs (histogram) and the proportions of translatable circRNAs (line chart). TPM: mean transcript per kilobase million.
We employed both CICADA and ORFfinder to investigate the circRNA translation landscape in esophageal cancer cell lines, along with matched proteomic data. Based on the overlap with known proteins, compared to the ORFfinder, CICADA identified a greater number of novel circRNA-encoded products that exhibited a length distribution similar to that of the UniProt dataset (Figure
4B
). We also surveyed the occurrence of exons and the length distribution of translatable circRNAs predicted by both CICADA and ORFfinder (
Supplementary Figures S6
and
S7
). Potential circRNA-encoded protein products predicted by CICADA were defined as novel peptides with an S-score greater than zero and a length of at least 30 amino acids. To validate these predictions using proteomic evidence, we searched the matched raw MS data from tandem mass tag (TMT) 11-plex labelled and LF samples for possible peptides (Figure
4C
). The searches were performed using a combined database containing all UniProt human proteins and predicted circRNA-coding products. Stringent filters and statistical tests were applied during proteomic data analysis to minimise false-positive results. CICADA identified 2336 translatable circRNAs with 18 427 circRNA-coded products supported by MS evidence in TMT 11-plex labelled samples and 2762 circRNAs with 50 877 circRNA-coded products supported by MS evidence in LF samples. In contrast, ORFfinder revealed 2 526 955 ORFs among all the identified circRNAs. Among these, 10 534 ORFs were supported by MS evidence in the TMT 11-plex labelled samples, and 12 032 ORFs were supported by MS evidence in LF samples. These results demonstrate that CICADA yields a significantly greater number of translatable circRNA-encoded products supported by MS evidence than the ORFfinder, especially in LF samples.
We also analysed the molecular characteristics of translatable circRNAs and circProts predicted using CICADA. Using the complete sequences of these circRNAs generated by psirc, we identified 202 799 translatable circRNAs, 4955 of which were supported by MS data (Figure
4D
). The chromosomal distributions of all circRNAs and translatable circRNAs were investigated (
Supplementary Figure S8
). These translatable circRNAs can be categorised into three types based on size and position. The first type includes circRNAs that undergo translation via a rolling-circle mechanism. The second type comprises circRNAs that can be translated into proteins without crossing the circRNA junction site or rolling. The third type consists of circRNAs that are translated into proteins by crossing the circRNA junction site but not through rolling. Notably, the majority of proteomic evidence-supported circProts belonged to the last category, although some circProts also fall into the first category. Both these categories can potentially serve as sources of novel protein products (Figure
4E
). Furthermore, we explored the relationship between circRNA expression and the proportion of translatable circRNAs. Surprisingly, despite the increasing mean transcript per kilobase million (TPM) values of circRNAs, the proportion of translatable circRNAs did not vary (Figure
4F
).
Application of CICADA to identify functional translatable circRNAs in ESCC
We further identified functionally translatable circRNAs in ESCC cells (Figure
5A
). Analysis of circRNA repeatability and intercellular distribution revealed a significant number of frequently and highly expressed instances (
Supplementary Figures S9
–
S10
). Additionally, correlation analysis of circRNA expression demonstrated a strong association among the same cell lines, with greater relevance observed in the two normal esophageal cell lines than in other ESCC cell lines (
Supplementary Figure S11
).
Figure 5.
Application of CICADA to the identification of functional translatable circRNAs in ESCC.
A
Schematic of the process of screening differentially expressed circRNAs with coding potential and tumour-specific circRNAs with latent neoantigens.
B
The volcano plot illustrates differentially expressed genes. The
P
-values and log2 fold changes calculated with edgeR are presented here.
C
GO analysis was performed on the host genes of the differentially expressed circRNAs with coding potential. The first lap represents GO terms related to the host genes. The second lap indicates the number of genes in the genome background for each term and their Q value for enrichment. The third lap indicates the number of host genes enriched in each term. The fourth lap indicates the enrichment factor of each GO term.
D
The number of circRNA-encoded products with neoantigens filtered by NetMHCpan4.1 in each ESCC cell line. The left column represents the total quantity of circRNA-encoded products, while the right column represents the number of products predicted with latent neoantigens by NetMHCpan4.1.
E
Word cloud analysis to examine the frequency of neoantigens derived from translatable circRNAs. The ‘CICADA’ dataset comprises latent neoantigens, with a larger font indicating a greater neoantigen frequency.
F
Relationships between the length of circRNA-encoded products (
x
-axis), neoantigen number (
y
-axis), and neoantigen coverage of translatable circRNAs (color gradient).
G
Proteomic evidence was used to confirm the differential expression of circRNAs with coding potential predicted by CICADA; nt: nucleotide.
To analyse differences in circRNA expression between the 10 ESCC cell lines and two normal esophageal cell lines, we employed both DESeq2 and edgeR (
Supplementary Figure S12
). After taking the intersection, we identified 355 differentially expressed circRNAs (320 upregulated and 35 downregulated) in ESCC (Figure
5B
). Next, we used CICADA to predict the coding potential of these circRNAs, resulting in the identification of 222 circRNAs with coding potential. The identification of four translatable circRNAs was supported by MS data (
Supplementary Table S7
). We subsequently conducted a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the host genes of these circRNAs (Figure
5C
,
Supplementary Figure S13
). The analysis revealed significant enrichment of cell nuclear activity, including nuclear migration (GO:0007097), nuclear membrane (GO:0031965), nuclear envelope (GO:0005635), and nucleotide transmembrane transporter activity (GO:0015215 and GO:0015216). We identified a representative translatable circRNA and its products, revealing its potential as a functional circRNA in ESCC (Figure
5G
).
Furthermore, we identified highly expressed (TPM > 1) tumour-specific circRNAs exclusively found in the 10 ESCC cell lines but not in the two normal esophageal cell lines. Concurrently, we utilised RNA-seq to determine the HLA types in these 12 cell lines. Subsequently, we used CICADA to predict translatable circRNAs and specifically explored circProts, as supported by proteomic evidence (
Supplementary Table S8
). Most of these circProts exhibited neoantigen potential as determined using NetMHCpan (Figure
5D
). Notably, some of the high-frequency neoantigen peptide sequences were identified as “CICADA” (Figure
5E
). Therefore, we further investigated the relationship between the length of circProts, the number of neoantigens, and neoantigen coverage of translatable circRNAs. Overall, these findings indicate that the number of neoantigens tends to increase as the length of the circRNA-coding products increases. However, the increase in neoantigen coverage did not occur proportionally (Figure
5F
). Furthermore, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the distribution of chromosomes and positions of these functionally translatable circRNAs. (
Supplementary Figures S14
–
S15
). Our findings revealed that most functionally translatable circRNAs originate from the CDSs of chromosomes 3 and 17.
Application of CICADA to the pan-cancer circRNA translation landscape
After establishing the effectiveness and efficiency of CICADA through the aforementioned series of tests, we collected unmatched circRNA and proteomic data to demonstrate its robustness. Subsequently, we employed CICADA to characterise the translation landscape of pan-cancer circRNAs. For this analysis, we selected circRNA sequences from various cancer types, including glioblastoma (GBM), head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSC), breast cancer (BRCA), lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), lung squamous cell cancer (LUSC), liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC), kidney cancer (KDNY), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBC), and ovarian cancer (OV), from circNet 2.0 (
Supplementary Figure S16
). Additionally, we obtained proteomic data from the National Cancer Institute's PDC, iProX, and ProteomeX (Figure
6A
). Using CICADA, we predicted translatable circRNAs in each cancer type and searched for circProts in the MS data. We identified 619 proteomics-supported translatable circRNAs in BRCA, 31 in DLBC, 139 in GBM, 535 in HNSC, 367 in KDNY, 641 in LIHC, 197 in LUAD, 139 in LUSC and 74 in OV (Figure
6B
,
Supplementary Table S9
).
Figure 6.
Pan-cancer analysis of the translatable circRNA profile using CICADA.
A
Overview for identifying circRNA-encoded proteins in various cancers using unmatched circRNA and proteomic data, with circRNA sequences from circNet.
B
The pan-cancer translatable circRNA number. MS: mass spectrometry.
C
Proportions of circRNAs that overlapped with different mRNA regions were analysed for each type of cancer. The figure shows the distribution of all circRNAs, translatable circRNAs predicted by CICADA, and translatable circRNAs supported by proteomic evidence from left to right for each type of cancer.
D
The length distribution of HPCR, circProt, and circProt with MS evidence of translatable circRNAs across cancers. MS: mass spectrometry.
E
Survey of circRNA-encoded products predicted by CICADA across cancers. Clockwise, the figure displays HPCR, circProt, and circProt with MS evidence for each type of cancer. From the outer lap to the inner lap are circRNAs translated into proteins in a rolling-circle fashion, circRNAs translated into proteins that neither cross circRNA junction sites nor roll, and circRNAs translated into proteins that cross circRNA junction sites but not roll for each type of cancer.
F
Host genes of translatable circRNAs in each type of cancer were analysed using GO analysis. The size of the circles represents the gene ratio in each GO term, while the colour represents the adjusted
P
-value of gene enrichment in each term. SC, structural constituent; PB, protein binding; RA, regulator activity; EF, exchange factor; Modi, modification; Methy, methylation; spe-bd, specific binding.
Similar to ESCC, most translatable circRNAs originated from regions overlapping with mRNAs, particularly within the CDS (Figure
6C
). Most circRNA-encoded proteins, as supported by proteomic evidence, are translated without crossing the circRNA junction or rolling. We subsequently examined the length distribution of the circRNA-encoded products across cancers and found that most proteomic evidence-supported translatable circRNAs and products were concentrated within a range of 1000 nucleotides (Figure
6D
,
Supplementary Figure S17
). A substantial proportion of circRNAs are translated into a rolling circle or proteins that cross the circRNA junction site without rolling. Both proteins gave rise to novel protein products (Figure
6E
). Finally, GO analysis of the host genes of translatable circRNAs in each cancer type revealed that most genes were enriched for protein binding, such as cadherin binding, modification-dependent protein binding, and histone binding. Additionally, some genes were enriched in enzymatic activities, including protein serine kinase activity, GTPase binding and regulatory activity (Figure
6F
).
Discussion
Although advanced high-throughput technology and circRNA identification algorithms have led to the detection of numerous circRNAs (
24–36
), identifying translatable circRNAs and their protein products remains a challenge. One of the main reasons for this is that current algorithms primarily focus on detecting ribosome-associated circRNAs through ribosome polysome profiling (
16
,
27–29
). However, the number of ribo-circRNAs is typically quite low, usually no more than a dozen (
16
). Additionally, mono-/multiribosome-bound RNA indicates protein translation signals but does not necessarily represent actual protein synthesis (
30
). MS analysis is the most widely used method for determining transcript coding ability on a large scale. However, MS often relies on a protein database-dependent approach that requires a substantial expected protein pool (
31
). One common strategy for constructing protein databases is to search for potential circRNA-ORFs (
32
). However, the MS evidence only supports a few thousand cytoplasmic circRNAs.
To address these challenges, we developed a new algorithm that combines circRNA sequence analysis with MS data. This algorithm initially predicts HPCRs and then searches for circProts based on HPCRs, resulting in a significant increase in the number of MS-supported circRNA-coding products. Furthermore, the algorithm offers strict and loose modes to cater to different scenarios, ensuring accurate searches and comprehensive screening. On the one hand, this approach improves the sensitivity of translatable circRNA prediction; on the other hand, it resolves the issue of nonspecificity in the protein pool for MS analysis. Of note, in this study, all the predicted HPCRs and circProts were obtained from the protein database, as are all known human proteins in UniProt. A large proportion of HPCRs were recognised, indicating the significance of these HPCRs.
CICADA utilises sequence-intrinsic features that consider both linguistic features characterising coding RNA sequences and biological significance characterising circRNA translation. It is an algorithm inherited from CNCI (
33
) and retains the powerful signature and profile of the pairs of ANTs, demonstrating its ability to distinguish between translatable and untranslatable circRNAs. ORFs (size and coverage) are commonly used due to their discriminatory power and ease of calculation. In this algorithm, we also incorporated HPCR size and coverage as core features, which play a pivotal role in distinguishing coding circRNAs. In terms of the circRNA translation mechanism, we applied the m6A score, m6A number, and the presence of IRES. It is worth noting that, in the case of reverse HPCR, m6A and IRES were also predicted in the reverse sequence. Previous beliefs that circRNAs cannot be translated due to the lack of the 5’ and 3’ ends for the m7G cap and poly(A) tail have been disproved by further studies, showing that circRNAs were previously considered not to be translated. Further studies have validated that circRNAs are translated via cap-independent pathways (
13
,
14
). The presence of an IRES or m6A modification-mediated aggregation of the translation complex supports this notion. In particular, IRES proteins mediate translation initiation by acting as RNA scaffolds to interact with the alternative initiation factor eIF4G or the eIF3 complex to recruit 40S subunits instead of the 5’ end-eIF4E complex (
34
). The m6A motif in circRNAs can also recruit eIF4G2 and the m6A reader YTHDF3 to initiate translation, which is enhanced by the methyltransferase METTL3/14 and inhibited by the demethylase FTO (
35
). Nonetheless, additional translation mechanisms should be explored as they not only contribute to our understanding of biological phenomena but can also be used for algorithmic predictions.
This algorithm is driven by the accumulating evidence of circRNA-encoded proteins in various biological and oncological processes. Translated circRNAs and the encoded proteins have been identified to have multiple functions in colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, GBS, hepatocellular carcinoma, multiple myeloma and triple-negative BRCA (
36–41
). CircRNA-encoded proteins play pivotal roles in the diagnosis and treatment of human cancers by affecting cancer metabolism, signalling pathways, cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and other carcinogenic mechanisms. To this end, we also developed a pan-cancer circRNA translation profile based on our CICADA algorithm, which allowed us to explore the hidden proteome of circRNAs. These proteins may play carcinogenic or tumour-suppressive roles or become neoantigens, contributing to the discovery, optimisation and development of new tools based on biological proteins for early cancer diagnosis and anticancer drug development (
42
).
Our algorithm also has certain limitations. First, CICADA is currently only applicable to homo sapiens and has not been extended to other species, which is related to the relatively low number of circRNAs identified in other species. As the recognition and functional exploration of circRNAs in other species deepen, CICADA will attempt to apply to multiple species. Secondly, although the current features can already effectively distinguish between negative and positive data sets, we will continue to explore the inclusion of more features related to circRNA encoding in the future, such as two-dimensional and three-dimensional structural features of RNA. Additionally, with the advancement of machine learning algorithms, more suitable training models may yield better results, and we will continuously experiment with these. Lastly and most importantly, our algorithm focuses on high-throughput mining of translatable circRNA profiles. We will also persistently pay attention to and improve upon how to bridge to experimental methods for verifying the real coding potential of circRNAs, as well as how to provide a user-friendly visualisation interface for researchers without a bioinformatics background.
In summary, the CICADA software offers a unique opportunity to accurately assess the coding potential of circRNAs and map a broader circRNA-coding landscape. This substantial advancement in circRNA research not only deepens our understanding of the hidden proteome but also assists in the investigation and identification of previously unannotated proteins encoded by circRNAs. With its reliable and effective prediction capabilities, CICADA has paved the way for valuable insights into the intricate realm of circRNA biology.
Supplementary Material
gkae1179_Supplemental_Files