1
Introduction
Saliva, a biofluid primarily secreted by three pairs of major salivary glands (submandibular, sublingual, and parotid), is composed of water, ions, and food residues, cellular debris, microorganisms [
1
,
2
]. Over the past two decades, saliva has garnered significant attention for its rich bio‐components, including proteins, metabolites, human and microbial DNA, mRNA, and microRNA. In recent years, saliva tests have been developed for detecting specific infectious agents such as SARS‐CoV‐2, HIV, and HPV, as well as for monitoring drug use and abuse and assessing oral health [
3
,
4
,
5
,
6
]. Moreover, saliva collection offers distinct advantages over other biofluids such as blood and cerebrospinal fluid, being noninvasive, repeatable, low‐cost, and self‐accessible. Importantly, saliva allows for real‐time exchange of bio‐information with blood and may contain a broader range of proteins than blood itself [
4
,
7
,
8
], thereby presenting significant potential for salivary diagnosis. However, the lack of FDA‐approved saliva diagnostics for disease evaluation or detection underscores the need for further research to fully elucidate the significance and value of salivary tests.
In the era of system biology, saliva omics remains relatively understudied [
9
]. We propose that there are several possible contributors. First, compared to other diagnostic biofluids, saliva typically contains lower concentrations of biomarkers. Moreover, it was reported that the presence of biological information was detectable in blood but not in saliva [
10
]. Second, the methodologies for saliva analysis have not been well‐established or standardized. Presently, there is a lack of consensus on procedures for sample collection (e.g., on ice or at room temperature), processing (e.g., with or without centrifugation and the use of inhibitors), and preservation (ranging from −20 to −80°C), resulting in significant variability across studies [
11
]. Third, subjects of the tests have not been as well defined as those for serum/plasma and whole blood detection [
12
]. Whole saliva (WS), supernatants and deposits after centrifugation, or detached cells have all been reported, and thus, the different candidates reaching different results, ultimately, made salivary tests difficult to obtain optimal reproducibility and validity. Furthermore, there were currently no reports on comparing the differences between different saliva test candidates, such as the difference between WS and cell‐free saliva (CFS, supernatants with the filtered by 0.2 µm membrane), which further complicates interpretation and standardization efforts.
Human saliva production ranges from approximately 0.5 to 1.5 L daily, constituting a biofluid abundant in various biological omics components, notably thousands of proteins [
13
]. Proteomics has significantly enhanced our ability to identify potential biomarkers at a high throughput level, thereby advancing the cataloging of human salivary bioinformation and exploring its diagnostic value [
14
,
15
]. Despite the substantial progress in genomics, the application of proteomic informatics in science and medicine has lagged behind, primarily due to the inherent complexity of protein molecules and the lack of equivalently amplified mechanisms for low‐abundance proteins [
16
]. This limitation hinders scalability and makes comprehensive studies of the salivary proteome exceptionally challenging. While current research has contributed to understanding the salivary proteome, the identification of novel and potentially diagnostic biomarkers remains limited in clinical practice [
4
]. Interestingly, the salivary proteome was estimated about 30% overlaps with those in plasma [
17
,
18
]. However, the exact size of the salivary proteome remains unknown, with estimates suggesting more than 3000 proteins present [
19
], suggesting substantial potential for saliva diagnosis.
Numerous studies have explored liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) for comprehensive saliva proteomics [
20
]. They had limitations in terms of breadth and depth. Improving proteomic performance can be achieved in at least two possible ways: (1) enhancing sample preparation to increase the detectable abundance of proteins and (2) adopting more advanced acquisition modes to improve detection sensitivity. Advanced acquisition modes may include increasing the dimensionality of mass spectrometry detection (e.g., by incorporating ion mobility) and extending acquisition times.
Here, we conducted a comparative study using label‐free quantitative proteomics, data‐independent acquisition mass spectrometry with the detection of ion mobility (DIA‐MS) to investigate differences in the salivary proteomes from various subjects (both WS and CFS with or without nanoparticles enriched for low‐abundance proteins). By comparing our findings to the database of Human Salivary Proteome (HSP,
https://salivaryproteome.org
) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM,
https://www.omim.org
), we identified 2171 proteins that were not included in the HSP and demonstrated 3588 proteins matched to OMIM. These may provide insights into appropriate saliva subjects and sample preparation methods for exploring the potential clinical applications of saliva.
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Saliva Collection
This study was approved by the Ethical Committees of Southeastern University Hospital and informed written consent was obtained from all participants. Ten male participants aged between 18 and 55 were recruited from the healthy population at Southeastern University Hospital. Participants were instructed to refrain from eating, drinking, smoking, or chewing gum within 1 h prior to saliva collection. Before collection, individuals rinsed their mouths with clean water to remove oral tissue and debris. Saliva samples of 1–2 mL were collected by drooling into a 50 mL vial placed on ice in an unstimulated state at 9:00 a.m. [
21
]. Following collection, the fresh saliva was promptly treated with PMSF (ST507, Beyotime, CN) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (04906837001, Roche, CH) to minimize protein degradation. After dispensing 200 µL WS, CFS was obtained by centrifuging at 15,000 ×
g
for 20 min at 4°C to remove particles and filtered by 0.2 µm membrane. The samples were then stored at ‐80°C until further use. WS and CFS were treated with EasyPept DeeP Low Abundance Protein Enrichment and Preparation Kit, group as WSD and CFSD, while peptides prepared without these kits were named WSN and CFSN (Figure
1A
).
FIGURE 1
Characteristics of the salivary proteome of 10 healthy volunteers. A: Workflow for salivary proteomes. B: Principal component analysis (PCA) results displaying the first two components of the analysis for the salivary proteome. C: Quantification of relative standard deviation (RSD, coefficient of variation) for the salivary proteome. D: Quantification of peptide (pep) and protein (pro) frequencies in the WSD and WSN groups, respectively. E: Quantification of peptide (Stripped Sequence Frequence in left Y‐axis) and protein (Protein Groups Frequence in right Y‐axis) frequence in the CFSD and CFSN groups, respectively. F: Venn diagram of the identified proteins between WSN and CFSN. G: Venn diagram of the identified proteins between WSD and CFSD. H: Quantification of the number of proteins in each group. I: Quantification of the number of peptides in each group. Data are means ± SEM,
N
= 10.
T
‐tests were performed.
2.2
Protein Extraction and Concentration Determination
Initially, the sample was thawed. Subsequently, the solution was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was collected and subjected to further centrifugation to obtain the final supernatant, representing the total protein solution of the sample. The concentration of the sample was quantified utilizing the BCA (23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) protein concentration determination method.
2.3
Low Abundance Protein Enrichment and Preparation
For sample preparation with nanoparticles, we followed the EasyPept DeeP Low Abundance Protein Enrichment and Preparation Kit (OSFP0002, Omicsolution, CN) manual for sample processing. Initially, magnetic nanoparticles of 1 mg underwent washing, followed by resuspending them in the wash buffer. Subsequently, 25 µL of saliva sample was added, then incubated at 37°C with shaking at 300 rpm for 1 h. After discarding the supernatant, the samples were washed three times. Reagent A was pipetted and mixed, followed by the addition of reagent B, and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Upon cooling to room temperature, reagents C and D were added for enzymatic digestion at 37°C for 2 h. To stop the digestion, reagent E was added; centrifugation at 20,000 ×
g
for 1 min, and the supernatant was collected. Then the samples were loaded onto a desalting column, following wash buffer cleansing. Double elution was performed with Elution buffer, and subsequent concentration of the samples was achieved through vacuum freezing centrifugation. Peptide concentration measurement was conducted using Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), and 300 ng peptides of each sample were used for MS analysis.
2.4
Trypsin Digestion and Peptide Desalting
Following the determination of the protein concentration, an appropriate amount of protein was extracted from each sample. The samples from different groups were diluted with lysis buffer to standardize both the concentration and volume. Subsequently, DTT (Adamas‐beta, CH) was introduced to the protein solutions to achieve a final concentration of 5 mM, ensuring thorough mixing and a 30‐min incubation at 55°C. The solution was then cooled to room temperature after ice treatment and the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma, USA) to attain a final concentration of 10 mM. After meticulous blending, the solution was left in darkness at room temperature for 15 min. Protein precipitation involves the addition of six times the volume of acetone to the mixture, followed by an incubation at −20°C overnight. The resulting precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4°C and 8000 ×
g
for 10 min, with subsequent evaporation of acetone for 2–3 min. Next, resuspension of the precipitate was achieved by adding 100 µL of 50 mM NH
4
HCO
3
, followed by the addition of 1/50 of the sample mass of 1 mg/mL trypsin‐TPCK (HLS TRY001C, Hualishi, CN.) for overnight digestion at 37°C. The enzymatic reaction was concluded by adjusting the pH to approximately 3.0 using phosphoric acid. The peptides after enzymatic digestion were desalted using the SOLA SPE 96‐well plate (60209‐001, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
2.5
Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) Mass Spectrometry Analysis
The proteomic data analysis was conducted by Shanghai Luming Biological Technology Co., Ltd. in Shanghai, China. TimsTOF Pro2 mass spectrometer (Bruker, USA) equipped with an EASY‐nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were loaded and separated using a C18 trap column (25 cm × 75 µm, Waters, USA) on the EASY‐nLC 1200 system with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a 1 h linear gradient. The gradient settings were as follows: 0–45 min, 2%–22% B; 45–50 min, 22%–37% B; 50–55 min, 37%–80% B; 55–60 min, 80% B. A total of 56 DIA windows were acquired with an automatic gain control target of 3e6 and auto for injection time, while the collision energy was ramped linearly based on mobility from 20 to 59 eV, ion mobility was 0.7‐1.3 with the dry gas at 3 L/min. MS/MS spectra were recorded from 100 to 1700 m/z. The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the iProX [
22
], China National Center for Protein Sciences, (
https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org
, with the dataset identifier PXD055371).
2.6
Database Search
The Spectronaut Pulsar 18.0 (Biognosys, CH) utilized default factory settings for search and library generation. This included Trypsin/P as the enzyme, allowance of up to two missed cleavages, Oxidation of Methionine as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and a 1% FDR threshold for PSM, peptide, and protein identification. DIA data analysis was conducted using Spectronaut with the pre‐established spectral library uniprot‐Homo sapiens‐9606‐2023.2.1.fasta. The software parameters were configured as follows: precursor
q
‐value cutoff and Protein
q
‐value cutoff set at 0.01, normalization strategy defined as local normalization, and quantity MS‐Level set to use MS2.
2.7
Statistical Analyses
A total of 3817 expressed proteins were identified. Paired
t
‐test was used to compare the two groups and Benjamini–Hochberg was used to correct the multiple comparisons. Differential expression analysis utilized fold change (>2 or <0.5) and a significance threshold of
q
‐value <0.05 to determine differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Annotation of all identified proteins was conducted by R studio (version 4.2.2) through ggplots package with GO (
http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome
;
http://geneontology.org/
) and KEGG pathway (
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/
). DEPs were subjected to GO and KEGG enrichment analyses.
3
Results
3.1
Characteristics of the Detected Salivary Protein
To compare the protein differences between WS and CFS, we conducted protein identification in the saliva samples via DIA‐MS. Firstly, the proteins were identified in both WS and CFS using nanoparticles and without magnetic beads in 25 µL volumes, respectively (Figure
1A
). Principal component analysis (PCA) and relative standard deviation (RSD) analyses demonstrated good intra‐group consistency and significant inter‐group differences among the experimental samples (Figure
1B,C
). These illustrated that the difference comes more from the type of sample and the testing protocol than from the individual. A total of 3817 proteins were identified from the collected saliva (Table
S1
). Comparatively, 3263 proteins were identified from WS and 2043 from CFS without nanoparticles using DIA‐MS (Figure
1D–H
). CFS proteins shared 94.57% identity with WS‐identified proteins, with 1331 proteins exclusively found in WS (Figure
1F
). Notably, nanoparticle treatment significantly increased protein identification, resulting in 3413 and 2340 proteins detected in WS and CFS, respectively, representing 1.12‐ and 1.15‐fold increases compared to samples without magnetic beads (Figure
1D–H
). Moreover, the number of detected peptide segments significantly increased following nanoparticle enrichment (Figure
1E,I
). Additionally, we compared the quantitative performance between WS and CFS collected from the same healthy participant, revealing a positive correlation with good coefficients for all samples (Figure
S1
). These findings suggest that 25 µL of both bulk saliva and saliva supernatant contain abundant proteins, with greater protein content in WS, likely due to the inclusion of proteins from salivary gland secretions and oral epithelial cells. Despite the relatively low proportion of high‐abundance proteins in saliva, even without enrichment, we also detected 2638 proteins. Notably, the enrichment of low‐abundance proteins led to the detection of a greater number of proteins, suggesting that while high‐abundance proteins were less prevalent in saliva, low‐abundance proteins were not. These results also underscored the potential diagnostic roles of saliva.
Referring to the HSP database, 1646 proteins were consistent with our salivary proteome data, and 2171 proteins have not been reported in HSP [
7
] (Figure
2A
). A total of 1548 and 1283 proteins in WSD and CFSD were shared with the HSP database (Figure
2B,C
). Furthermore, to evaluate the potent of promising applications of our salivary proteome analysis in the diagnosis of genetically related diseases, OMIM, a database that contains causative genes of human genetic disorders, was referred to [
23
]. Among the identified proteins, 3234 and 2224 proteins in WSD and CFSD have been registered in the OMIM (Figure
2E,F
) and there was much higher number of the genetic‐disorder proteins in WS than that in CFS detected under the same conditions. WS proteome may be useful to diagnose the gene‐related diseases, and it can rapidly screen for proteins (Figure
2D–F
).
FIGURE 2
Comparison of the identified proteins with those in the HSP and OMIM databases. A–C: Venn diagram illustrating the overlap of identified proteins between the HSP database and the saliva proteome (A), WSD (B), and CFSD (C) groups. D–F: Comparison of the identified proteins registered in the OMIM database. The yellow area shows the number of the corresponding genes registered in the OMIM database among the identified proteins in saliva (D), WSD (E), and CFSD (F) groups. HSP indicates Human Salivary Proteome; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
3.2
Evaluation of the Low Abundance Proteins in Both WS and CFS
After enrichment with nanomagnetic beads, we detected a greater number of proteins in both WS and CFS. Through our analysis, we found that the identified low‐abundance proteins numbered 311 in WS and 613 in CFS (Figure
3A,B
). The identified low‐abundance proteins in WS were highly correlated with pathways involving glycan metabolism (Figure
3C–F
). In contrast, the low‐abundance proteins identified in CFS were associated with pathways involving the proteasome, glutamate, and neurodegenerations (Figure
3G–J
).
FIGURE 3
Low‐abundance protein enrichment with nanoparticles in both WS and CFS. A and B: Expression levels of proteins after low‐abundance protein enrichment with nanoparticles for WS (A) and CFS (B). The red dots represent the top 50 identified proteins in WS or CFS, while the blue dots represent proteins detected after treatment with nanoparticles. C: Venn diagram illustrating the overlap of identified proteins between WSN and WSD. D: Volcano plot of differentially expressed proteins between WSN and WSD. E and F: KEGG pathways (E) and biological functions (F) of the proteins in WS after treatment with nanoparticles. G: Venn diagram illustrating the overlap of identified proteins between CFSN and CFSD. H: Volcano plot of differentially expressed proteins between CFSN and CFSD. I and J: KEGG pathways (I) and biological functions (G) of the proteins in CFS after treatment with nanoparticles.
3.3
Characteristics of the Differential Proteins in Both WS and CFS
To compare the similarities and differences between two different types of saliva samples, WS and CFS, we analyzed the functions of proteins that were shared and unique to each sample type (Figure
4A,B
). Firstly, the enrichment of functionally related proteins shared between these two types of saliva samples ranked proteasome and innate immune response (Figure
4C,D
). Proteins unique to CFS included HIP1, MATN2, and CA1 (Figure
4E,F
), while those unique to WS included TUG1, RHOD, and NUBP2 (Figure
4G,H
). These results indicate that not only do WS and CFS differ in terms of the types of detectable proteins, but they also exhibit significant differences in function. This provides insights for future sample handling in diagnosing different types of diseases.
FIGURE 4
Characteristics of the differential proteins between WSD and CFSD. A: Volcano plot of differentially expressed proteins between WSN and WSD. B: Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins between WSN and WSD. C and D: KEGG pathway (C) and biological function (D) in WSD and CFSD co‐expressed proteins. E and F: KEGG pathway (E) and top 10 biological functions (F) of proteins that were only expressed in WSD but not in CFSD. G and H: KEGG pathway (G) and top 10 biological functions (H) of proteins that were only expressed in CFSD but not in WSD.
4
Discussions
Saliva, as a biofluid, offers great promise for noninvasive diagnostics and disease monitoring due to its accessibility, ease of collection, and potential for reflecting systemic health status [
4
,
24
]. However, the discovery and validation of salivary biomarkers is still largely in the exploratory stage and deserves further research. Therefore, it will be necessary to account for the type of saliva samples used and to strive for standardization to ensure comparable results [
20
]. And here, we found that the type of saliva samples and the detected method were more varied and critical to differences in results than individual.
In this study, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of protein composition and functionality in WS and CFS for the first time, aiming to elucidate differences between these two sample types and explore their potential diagnostic value (Figure
1A
). To determine the diagnostic roles of saliva, the different subjects of saliva proteome of saliva were conducted for the first time since WS and CFS were both studied in the previous reports [
11
]. A total of 3817 proteins were cataloged in the saliva protein profiles, including the most common proteins (amylase and mucin) and the low abundance proteins, like Taurine upregulated gene 1 (TUG1) and interleukin‐1 alpha (IL1A) (Table
S1
). Surprisingly, over 3000 proteins were identified in just 25 µL of fresh saliva (Figure
1D–I
), marking the smallest volume ever reported for saliva omics, whether targeted or non‐targeted (4 mL [
25
], 200 µL [
26
], 180 µL [
27
]). This tiny saliva identified proteins that overlapped well with HSP and OMIM databases, suggesting great potential for the detection of micro‐volumes of saliva. Otherwise, this approach enhances the convenience, simplicity, and patient‐friendliness of saliva testing. Participants can easily collect a minute amount of saliva at home and subsequently mail it to a laboratory for comprehensive data collection and analysis [
28
].
The sensitivity and reproducibility of proteome have improved with the development of the data‐independent acquisition mode (DIA) [
29
]. Within DIA, all detected precursor ions are fragmented within an isolation window covering the complete mass‐to‐charge range with the ion mobility been considering. Whereas in data‐dependent acquisition mode (DDA), the most abundant ion peaks are selected on the first MS for fragmentation and subsequent identification. While highly abundant proteins in saliva may not be as prominent as those in blood, saliva contains a significant number of low‐abundance proteins [
30
], which has posed a challenge in fully harnessing the potential of salivary proteins. Our study demonstrated that the enrichment of low‐abundance proteins in both WS and CFS samples using nanoparticles significantly enhanced protein detection sensitivity. Moreover, enrichment with nanoparticles was more effective in improving protein identification in CFS compared to WS (Figure
2A‐H
). These may illustrate more low‐abundance proteins in CFS, and the high‐abundance proteins in WS may overshadow the detection of low‐abundance proteins, leading to their absence or reduced representation in the WSD. This enrichment facilitated the identification of proteins involved in key biological processes, such as glycan metabolism in WS and proteasome, glutamate, and neurodegenerations in CFS (Figure
3C‐H
). The ability to detect low‐abundance proteins in saliva is particularly advantageous for biomarker discovery and disease diagnosis. Previous studies have reported approximately 3000 salivary proteins [
31
]. However, through the enrichment of low‐abundance proteins using nanoparticles, we expanded the pool of detectable proteins and identified 3817 proteins in saliva. Considering the limited number of volunteers in our study, we anticipate that the total number of proteins in human saliva surpasses this count.
More importantly, our results revealed substantial disparities in protein number and functionality between WS and CFS. While both sample saliva subjects shared functionally related proteins, each also exhibited a distinct protein associated with specific cellular pathways and biological functions. Co‐expressed proteins played a role in proteasome and innate immune response (Figure
4C,D
). The observed differences in protein composition between WS and CFS may be attributed to the diverse cellular origins of these samples. WS contains proteins derived from salivary gland secretions, oral epithelial cells, and other oral cavity components, whereas CFS primarily consists of proteins derived from systemic circulation [
32
], as well as those originating from oral mucosal cells and epithelial cells. The distinct protein profiles observed in WS and CFS highlight the potential diagnostic value of each sample type for different disease contexts. Notably, proteins unique to WS were enriched in pathways related to oxidative phosphorylation and neurological disorders including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), while those unique to CFS were associated with the proteasome and glycosaminoglycan metabolism. Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the progressive loss of neuronal cells in the central nervous system [
33
]. Several studies have reported that the secretion and composition of saliva were parasympathetically regulated by the cranial nerves VII (facial nerve) and IX (glossopharyngeal nerve) [
2
], which may illustrate a close link between the saliva and the central nervous system. Furthermore, specific biomarkers, which are related to neurological and psychiatric disorders have also been used to be detected in saliva [
11
,
34
,
35
]. Salivary BDNF levels were significantly higher in students with more depressive symptoms [
36
]. These may illustrate the potential roles of saliva in the diagnosis of neurological disorders, and further research is needed to bridge the salivary and central nervous system.
Overall, our study provided valuable insights into the complex landscape of protein composition and functionality in WS and CFS. These findings underscore the importance of considering the specific characteristics of each saliva sample type when designing diagnostic assays or conducting biomarker discovery studies. We detected 3817 salivary proteins with the treatment of nanoparticles, and we concluded that WS and CFS could be used as an alternative biofluid to blood with enhanced sample preparation and improved acquisition modes via LC‐MS/MS. These proteins included many gene‐related proteins for genetic disorders, and interestingly, more neurological‐involved proteins were found in WS, while proteasome and glycosaminoglycan metabolism‐related proteins in CFS. With the elucidation of the differences between these sample types and identifying unique protein signatures associated with specific cellular pathways, it was suggested that WS and CFS could be used for future clinical applications, such as diagnosing, screening, and monitoring. Moving forward, further research efforts should improve the detectability of low‐abundance proteins/cytokines in saliva limitations and enabled the identification of more proteins that were otherwise exclude in the HSP database, and focus on validating these findings in larger cohorts and exploring the clinical implications of saliva‐based biomarkers for disease diagnosis and monitoring.
Author Contributions
All authors contributed to this review's conception and design. L.‐l.J. conducted the experiments and prepared the manuscript, tables, and figures. H.‐l.D., J.L., Y.‐h.Q., and P.‐l.W. polished the language and prepared the figures. J.Z. and F.C. assisted in conducting the experiments. C‐j.W., Y.C., and Y.Z. prepared the tables and performed data analysis. H‐y.Z. and F.L. conceptualized the study, designed the experiments, and supervised the project. All authors assisted with the maintenance of the availability of reagents, sample processing, and data analysis, and contributed to the editing of the manuscript. All authors agree to be accountable for the content of the work.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Supporting information
Supporting Information
Supporting Information