Efavirenz (EFV), an antiretroviral, is used in combination with
other drugs such as emtricitabine and tenofovir for human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) treatment.
1
Further, EFV belongs
to a drug class named non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
that inhibit HIV replication noncompetitively.
2
,
3
The
chemical structure of EFV is shown in
Figure
1
. Of note, EFV is included in the World Health
Organization’s list of essential medications. Moreover, several
studies have reported the potential utility of EFV-based prophylaxis
for HIV prevention.
4
,
5
Although antiretroviral treatment
reduces the mortality rates related to HIV infection, individuals
exposed to certain antiretrovirals such as EFV experience increased
rates of non-HIV-associated or drug-induced comorbidities (adverse
effects), including neurocognitive impairment.
6
−
12
Clinical studies have reported that EFV-induced adverse effects
on the brain often manifest within days of treatment initiation and
may worsen with long-term use.
6
,
7
,
10
Although there are abundant clinical reports showing evidence of
EFV-induced brain disorders, the mechanisms underlying the above antiretroviral-induced
adverse effects are unknown.
Figure 1
Chemical structure of EFV.
Lipids are important biomolecules that have crucial
roles in the
brain through their involvement in signaling and energy storage in
addition to their structural roles.
13
,
14
Importantly,
the brain has a high concentration of lipids, second only to adipose
tissue.
15
,
16
Several studies have shown that there is
an association between altered lipid levels and an increased risk
of adverse effects in the central nervous system.
17
−
21
Additionally, it has been demonstrated that certain
drugs of abuse such as cocaine can induce phospholipid changes in
rat brains in a region-specific manner.
22
,
23
Importantly,
altered levels of glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids are considered
to be associated with brain disorders. However, region-specific alterations
of brain lipids in response to neurotoxic drugs such as EFV have not
been investigated.
Previous studies have reported that EFV-based
antiretroviral therapy
has been associated with changes in lipid levels that may lead to
an elevated risk of adverse effects.
24
−
26
In one study, the significant
changes in plasma lipids were observed in research participants who
received an EFV-based antiretroviral regimen.
24
Further, 12 lipid molecules were significantly increased in the
EFV treatment group as compared to the nucleoside/nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitor treatment group.
24
In these studies, the lipid abnormalities have been studied using
plasma samples of research participants; however, alterations of individual
lipid molecules in the brain tissues following EFV treatment are yet
to be explored. Nevertheless, there is a paucity of methods that can
be used to directly analyze lipid molecules in brain tissues following
antiretroviral treatments.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
mass spectrometry imaging
(MALDI MSI) is a powerful label-free tool to generate the spatial
localization profiles of a wide range of biomolecules, including lipids
directly in specific anatomical locations.
27
−
29
Of note, MALDI
MSI has high molecular specificity compared to traditional imaging
approaches such as microscopy and histochemistry. Although MALDI MSI
facilitates the simultaneous analysis and visualization of numerous
lipid classes with region-specificity using a single tissue section,
the identification of lipids is a major challenge. In this regard,
on-tissue tandem mass spectrometry enables the identification of different
lipid molecules.
30
The application of MALDI
MSI to analyze brain lipids during disease conditions has been reported.
For example, a recent study reported region-specific changes of sulfatides
in nonhuman primate brains with Parkinson’s disease compared
to the control using MALDI MSI.
31
Moreover,
several studies employed MALDI MSI to study brain lipid localization
alterations in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
32
,
33
On the other hand, mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a well-established
method to investigate protein profiles in the biological samples in
a targeted or untargeted manner.
34
Of note,
the above approaches, MALDI MSI-based multiomics, can be employed
to investigate region-specific alterations of lipid metabolism in
the brain following drug treatments.
35
Herein, we employed a high-resolution MALDI MSI combined with a
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) approach to elucidate the region-specific
changes of lipid molecules (precursors and metabolites) in mouse brain
tissue sections following EFV treatment. Importantly, serial (adjacent)
tissue sections were subjected to bottom-up mass spectrometry-based
proteomics analysis to investigate the changes in the levels of brain
proteins, including lipid metabolizing enzymes following EFV treatment.
Through MALDI MSI work, we demonstrate the region-specific changes
in the localization of a range of lipid molecules: phosphatidylcholine
(PC), sphingomyelin (SM), ceramide phosphoinositol (PI-Cer), and hexosylceramide
(HexCer) in the mouse brain sections following exposure to EFV. Furthermore,
mass spectrometry-based proteomics data revealed changes in brain
proteins, including lipid metabolizing enzymes in EFV-treated mouse
brains compared to controls. The results obtained from MALDI MSI coupled
with mass spectrometry-based proteomics provide a unique platform
to understand region-specific lipid alterations in brain tissues following
EFV administration.
Results and Discussion
Optimization of the Detection of Lipid Molecules Using Authentic
Standards
In order to test and optimize the MALDI MS ionization
of a range of lipid molecules, including PCs and SMs, we first conducted
MALDI MS profiling experiments using authentic standards of selected
PCs, and SMs. For this purpose, several different matrices, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic
acid (DHB), α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 9-aminoacridine,
and 1,5-diaminonaphthalene were tested for their efficiency to facilitate
ionization of PC(32:0), PC(34:1), and SM(d18:1/18:0) in both positive
and negative polarities of the instrument. Among tested matrices,
DHB showed the best ionization of the above lipid species (PCs and
SMs) in positive ion mode. Further, collision-induced dissociation
(CID) fragmentation was carried out to confirm the identities of the
above lipid molecules (data not shown). Based on the above initial
work and previous literature,
37
,
38
we employed DHB as
a chemical matrix in the positive ion mode for imaging lipid molecules
in mouse brain tissues.
Detection and Identification of Lipid Molecules in Mouse Brain
Tissues
For this study, we used C57BL/6J mice to investigate
the EFV response in brain tissue. Previously, C57BL/6J strain has
been used in drug disposition and response studies.
36
The coronal brain sections obtained from eight-week-old
female mice were utilized for MALDI MSI experiments. The data were
acquired in the positive ion mode of a rapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper
mass spectrometer at 20 μm lateral resolution. The experimental
workflow is shown in
Figure
2
.
Figure 2
Experimental workflow of MALDI MSI and mass spectrometry-based
proteomics. Mouse brains were harvested 24 h following EFV treatment.
Subsequently, the harvested brains were sectioned at −20 °C.
The obtained 10 μm thick coronal brain sections from control
(
n
= 3) and EFV-treated (
n
= 3)
mice were thaw-mounted onto ITO-coated conductive glass slides and
the chemical matrix, DHB was sprayed by using a robotic sprayer. MALDI
MSI of lipids was performed at 20 μm spatial resolution in positive
ion mode. For mass spectrometry-based proteomics experiments, serial
coronal brain sections were collected and the suspension trap (S-trap)
protocol was utilized for sample preparation. Finally, tryptic peptides
were analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS)
coupled with ion mobility mass spectrometry.
The annotations of brain regions in the sections
were performed
according to the mouse brain anatomy described in Allen Brain Atlas
(
Figure
3
A). Additionally,
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was carried out to visualize
the tissue morphology and orientation (
Figure
3
B). We successfully annotated several brain
regions such as the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, corpus callosum,
thalamus, and corticospinal tract in the generated MALDI MS ion images
(
Figure
3
C). Using
positive ion mode, we detected several lipids belonging to PCs, SMs,
PI-Cers, and HexCers in the mouse brain tissue based on their high-resolution
accurate
m
/
z
values. In addition
to molecular ions, we observed several types of ion adducts, including
mainly sodium and potassium adducts corresponding to the detected
lipid species. This observation may be largely due to the presence
of high concentrations of sodium and potassium in the brain tissue.
30
The MS/MS spectra obtained by CID enabled the
identification of observed lipids (
Figure
3
D). The CID of PCs and SMs resulted in a
choline ion at
m
/
z
86 Da and a phosphocholine
ion at
m
/
z
184 Da while PI-Cers
showed headgroup fragments at
m
/
z
162 and 260, corresponding to inositol and phosphoinositol, respectively
(
Figures
3
D, and
S1 and S2
). Similarly, HexCers exhibit hexosyl
headgroup ion at
m
/
z
162 (
Figure S3
). The above characteristic mass fragments
have been used to characterize PCs, SMs, PI-Cers, and HexCers previously.
31
,
39
,
40
Figure 3
Visualization of lipid molecules in mouse
brain tissue sections.
(A) Anatomy of mouse brain coronal tissue section reported in the
Allen Brain Atlas, (B) H&E-stained brain section exhibiting the
anatomy and orientation, and (C) MALDI MS ion image. The brain regions:
cerebral cortex (CTX), hippocampus (HIP), thalamus (TH), corticospinal
tract (CST), and corpus callosum (CC) were successfully annotated
in MALDI MS ion image using the Allen Brain Atlas. (D) A representative
on-tissue mass spectrum showing the detection of PC(32:0) along with
its identification (MS/MS spectrum) by CID in positive ion mode. The
precursor ion at
m
/
z
756.550 was
subjected to CID fragmentation. The observed fragments at
m
/
z
86 and 184 corresponded to the structural
moieties of PC(32:0).
As expected, the most abundant ions corresponding
to lipid species
in brain tissues identified in positive ion mode were derived from
glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids. Among those, we detected lipid
molecules such as PCs which belong to glycerophospholipids, and SMs,
PI-Cers, and HexCers that belong to sphingolipids. PCs represent a
major class of lipids that contribute toward cell membrane integrity,
neuronal development, and protection against oxidative stress whereas
SMs and Cers are involved in signal transduction, neuronal differentiation,
synaptogenesis, and many other cellular processes in the brain.
41
,
42
The detection and identification of all reported lipid molecules
in mouse brain tissues were in concordance with previously published
work.
30
,
31
Region-Specific Localization of Lipids in Brain Tissue Sections
In order to investigate the spatial localization of the detected
individual lipid molecules in specific brain regions, ion maps were
generated for corresponding
m
/
z
values
of the lipids. Several lipid species such as PCs, SMs, PI-Cers, and
HexCers were identified as their [M + H]
+
(molecular ion),
[M + Na]
+
(sodium adduct), and [M + K]
+
(potassium
adduct) ions and visualized in different regions of the control brain
section. More specifically, PC(32:0), PC(38:5), SM (36:1;O2), and
PI-Cer(38:8) were found to be localized in the hippocampus region
while PC(38:6), PC(40:6), PC(40:7), SM(38:1;O2), and PI-Cer(40:3)
were localized in the thalamus region (
Figures
4
A–D,
5
A,
6
A,D and
S4C,D
, upper
panel). Moreover, PC(36:2), PC(40:4), PI-Cer(38:0), PI-Cer(38:1),
HexCer(42:1;O3), and HexCer(42:2;O3), exhibited localization in the
corpus callosum region of the brain (
Figures
4
E,F,
6
B,C,E,F, upper
panel). Additionally, we observed the spatial localization of PC(36:2),
PC(40:4), SM(42:1;O2), SM(43:1;O2), PI-Cer(38:1), PI-Cer(38:0), HexCer(42:2;O3),
and HexCer(42:2;O2) in the corticospinal tract (
Figures
4
E,F, 5D,F,
6
B,C,E,F,
and
S4F
, upper panel). Interestingly, PC(32:3)
and PC(34:2) showed relative homogeneity in their localization across
the brain section (
Figure S4A,B
, upper
panel).
Figure 4
MALDI MS ion images of PCs that showed differences in localization
between control (A–F upper panel) and EFV-treated (A–F
lower panel) mouse brain tissue section along with an intensity box
plot. Spatial localization profiles of (A) PC(32:0), (B) PC(38:5),
(C) PC(38:6), (D) PC(40:6), (E) PC(36:2), and (F) PC(40:4). Localization
profiles were generated at a spatial resolution of 20 μm. Intensity
box plots were created to show the relative abundance of lipid species
in control and EFV-treated brain tissue sections. The color scale
depicts the relative intensity normalized to TIC. The yellow color
indicates the maximum signal intensity (100%), while the blue color
denotes the minimum signal intensity (0%) of the ion selected. Scale
bar: 2 mm. The data are representative of three independent experiments
(
n
= 3; control and
n
= 3; EFV-treated).
Figure 5
MALDI MS ion images of SMs that showed differences in
localization
between control (A–F upper panel) and EFV-treated (A–F
lower panel) mouse brain tissue section along with an intensity box
plot. Spatial localization maps of (A) SM(36:1;O2), (B) SM(40:1;O2),
(C) SM(42:2;O2), (D) SM(42:1;O2), (E) SM(43:2;O2), and (F) SM(43:1;O2).
A spatial resolution of 20 μm was utilized to create ion images.
Intensity box plots were created to show the relative abundance of
lipid molecules in control and EFV-treated brain tissue sections.
The Color scale depicts the relative intensity normalized to TIC.
The yellow color indicates the maximum signal intensity (100%), while
the blue color denotes the minimum signal intensity (0%) of the ion
selected. Scale bar: 2 mm. The data are representative of three independent
experiments (
n
= 3; control and
n
= 3; EFV-treated).
The brain is a highly heterogeneous organ, and
its neuroanatomical
regions are rich in lipid species such as sphingolipids, glycerophospholipids,
and cholesterol.
41
,
43
,
44
Our findings from this work reveal the spatial localization of several
lipid molecules (precursors and metabolites) in various brain regions
such as the hippocampus, corpus callosum, thalamus, cerebral cortex,
and corticospinal tract. The hippocampus has a critical role in cognitive
function and behavior and any damage or dysfunction of the hippocampus
leads to brain disorders.
45
,
46
The corpus callosum
is a large bundle of nerve fibers that facilitates communication and
coordination between two hemispheres of the brain while the corticospinal
tract connects the corpus callosum to the spinal cord.
47
,
48
The thalamus is a critical communication center for brain function,
and any structural or functional alterations in the thalamus result
in brain disorders.
49
Similarly, the cerebral
cortex plays a central role in numerous cognitive, sensory, and motor
functions.
50
Lipids represent half of the
dry weight of the brain, and alterations in their levels in the above-mentioned
brain regions result in brain disorders.
31
,
51
,
52
Given the importance of the above brain
regions, our data provides spatial information on their region-specific
localizations as well as relative abundances in respective regions.
EFV-Induced Alterations in Localization of Lipids in Brain Tissue
Sections
The spatial distribution profiles of EFV and its
neurotoxic metabolite, 8-hydroxy EFV in mouse brains following in
vivo dosing of EFV-containing drug regimens have been reported previously.
36
Moreover, another study revealed region-specific
distribution of EFV in rat brain coronal tissue sections using MALDI
MSI.
53
Based on previous work, EFV is known
to accumulate in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, corpus callosum, corticospinal
tracts, thalamus, and hypothalamus regions. In the present work, we
confirmed the presence of EFV in brain tissue sections, including
in the hippocampus region, following EFV treatments (both 12- and
24 h postdose).
To investigate the EFV-induced changes in the
spatial localization of brain lipids, we performed MALDI MSI experiments
using brain tissue sections obtained from EFV-treated mice. The data
acquisition was performed in the positive polarity of the instrument
at 20 μm spatial resolution. MALDI MSI data obtained from control
and EFV-treated mice were imported together in the SCiLS Lab pro software
and ion images were generated. The ion images were normalized to total
ion count (TIC). Univariate discriminative analysis was carried out
in order to discern the differences in the observed localization patterns
of lipid molecules. For this, we compared ion images of each identified
lipid molecule in control versus EFV-treated brain tissue sections
by calculating the area under the curve (AUC) of receiver operating
characteristics (ROC) curves. Intensity box plots were generated to
show the relative abundance of the detected lipid molecules in control
and EFV-treated brain tissue sections. From MALDI MSI data, we found
region-specific alterations in the localization of several brain lipid
molecules following EFV treatment.
We observed EFV treatment-induced
region-specific alterations of
several PCs in the brain. Of the detected PCs, PC(32:0) and PC(38:5)
showed high abundance in the hippocampus region while PC(38:6) and
PC(40:6) showed their depletion in the thalamus region of the EFV-treated
mouse brains as compared to controls (
Figure
4
A–D). Further, PC molecules, PC(36:2)
and PC(40:4) had low ion abundance in the corticospinal tracts of
the EFV-treated group as compared to the control group while PC(40:4)
exhibited slightly higher ion intensity in the corpus callosum region
of the EFV-treated group (
Figure
4
E,F).
Of the SMs detected, SM(36:1;O2) exhibited
high abundance in the
hippocampus region while SM(40:1;O2), SM(42:2;O2), SM(42:1;O2), SM(43:2;O2),
and SM(43:1;O2) showed accumulation in the corpus callosum region
following EFV treatment (
Figure
5
A–F). Interestingly, three SMs, SM(40:1;O2),
SM(42:2;O2), and SM(43:2;O2) were accumulated in the corticospinal
tracts of the EFV-treated mice (
Figure
5
B,C,E).
We detected four PI-Cer and two HexCer
molecules: PI-Cer(38:8),
PI-Cer(38:1), PI-Cer(38:0), PI-Cer(40:3), HexCer(42:1;O3), and HexCer(42:2;O3)
(
Figure
6
A–F). Of these, PI-Cer(38:8) exhibited low ion
abundance in the hippocampus region while PI-Cer(38:1), PI-Cer(38:0),
HexCer(42:1;O3), and HexCer(42:2;O3) showed depletion in the corpus
callosum and corticospinal regions in response to EFV treatment (
Figure
6
A–C,E,F).
Similarly, we observed the depletion of PI-Cer(40:3) in the thalamus
region after EFV treatment (
Figure
6
D).
Figure 6
MALDI MS ion images of Cers that exhibited differences
in localization
between control (A–F upper panel) and EFV-treated (A–F
lower panel) mouse brain tissue section along with an intensity box
plot. Spatial localization maps of (A) PI-Cer(38:8), (B) PI-Cer(38:1),
(C) PI-Cer(38:0), (D) PI-Cer(40:3), (E) HexCer(42:1;O3), and (F) HexCer(42:2;O3).
Ion maps were created at a spatial resolution of 20 μm. Intensity
box plots were created to show the relative abundance of lipid species
in control and EFV-treated brain tissue sections. The color scale
depicts the relative intensity normalized to TIC. The yellow color
indicates the maximum signal intensity (100%), while the blue color
denotes the minimum signal intensity (0%) of the ion selected. Scale
bar: 2 mm. The data are representative of three independent experiments
(
n
= 3; control and
n
= 3; EFV-treated).
Lipids play vital structural and functional roles
in the tissues
and cells.
54
Specifically, in the brain,
lipids act as critical signaling molecules in the neural cells.
51
Recent studies have shown that there is an association
between altered lipid levels in the brain and an increased risk of
adverse effects (including a range of brain diseases) in the central
nervous system.
17
,
19
,
21
As a major finding, we investigated the accumulation of PC(32:0)
and PC(38:5) in the hippocampus region of mouse brains in response
to EFV treatment. Of note, previous studies have reported a significant
increase in both of these phospholipids in cerebrospinal fluid during
neurodegenerative disease conditions.
55
Therefore, our data suggest the potential involvement of PC(32:0)
and PC(38:5) in EFV drug response. Moreover, we observed low ion abundance
of PC(40:6) and PC(38:6) in the thalamus region of mouse brains following
EFV treatment. Interestingly, both of these lipid molecules, PC(40:6)
and PC(38:6) have been reported to be depleted in the plasma of participants
with impaired memory status compared to the normal control participants.
56
Similar to our data, elevated levels of PC(36:2)
and PC(40:4) have been observed in the brain disorder events.
57
,
58
Collectively, our data demonstrate the highly region-specific alterations
of the above lipid molecules following EFV treatment.
Dysregulated
sphingolipid levels in the brain are known to be associated
with abnormal brain function.
59
,
60
On the basis of our
data, the accumulation of several SMs such as SM(36:1;O2), SM(40:1;O2),
SM(42:2;O2), SM(42:1;O2), SM(43:2;O2), and SM(43:1;O2) in the different
brain regions was observed in response to EFV treatment. Importantly,
elevated levels of SMs have been observed in neurodegenerative diseases
such as AD and Parkinson diseases.
55
,
61
,
62
Further, the sphingolipid, SM(36:1;O2) has been reported
as a biomarker for AD to dichotomize AD-like pathology.
55
Provisionally, the accumulation of SM(36:1;O2)
in the hippocampus following EFV treatment could contribute to the
onset of EFV-induced adverse effects. Our data provides a motive to
further explore the role of SM(36:1;O2) in drug-induced adverse effects.
As a notable observation, we found the depletion of several Cers
such as PI-Cer(38:8), PI-Cer(38:1), PI-Cer(38:0), PI-Cer(40:3), HexCer(42:1;O3),
and HexCer(42:2;O3) in the different brain regions such as the hippocampus,
thalamus, corpus callosum, and corticospinal tracts following EFV
treatment. Previous studies have reported alterations of HexCers and
PI-Cers levels during aging and Schizophrenia.
63
,
64
Importantly, Cers are the precursors of complex sphingolipids.
65
The enzyme SM synthase is involved in the biotransformation
of Cer to SM.
66
Conversely, Cers can be
hydrolyzed products of SMs by sphingomyelinase.
67
The accumulation of SMs and depletion of Cers in response
to EFV treatment provides reasons to investigate the potential roles
of sphingolipid metabolism in drug responses.
Alterations of Mouse Brain Proteins following EFV Treatment
In order to determine the changes in protein expression levels
in brain tissue sections, we employed a bottom-up mass spectrometry-based
proteomics approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics experiments
were carried out in an unbiased manner and was coupled with ion mobility
mass spectrometry (trapped ion mobility) to enhance the separation
of peptides. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed to make
a comparison between protein expression profiles of control (vehicle-treated)
and EFV-treated mouse brains. From the proteomics experiments, approximately
2800 proteins were detected and identified across the EFV-treated,
as well as control brain tissue sections (
Figure S5
and
Supporting Information
Excel
spreadsheet). We detected several lipid metabolizing enzymes such
as ceramide synthase 2, phosphatidate phosphatase LPIN2, acid ceramidase,
and calcium-independent phospholipase A2-gamma in the brain tissues
(
Figure S6
). Notably, the levels of two
SM-Cer pathway proteins, ceramide synthase 2 and acid ceramidase were
decreased in response to EFV treatment (
Figure S6
). Additionally, the expression of cytosolic phospholipase
A2 and ceramide synthase 2 were confirmed by immunoblotting (
Figure S7
). Interestingly, the levels of 12 brain
proteins were significantly decreased in response to EFV treatment
(
Table
1
and
Figure S5
). These proteins include creatine kinase
U-type mitochondrial, Na
+
/K
+
transporting ATPase
subunit alpha 1, triosephosphate isomerase, tubulin beta-3 chain,
neurofilament medium chain, glycolipid transfer protein, and homer
protein homologue 1. The investigation of changes in the expression
levels of the above proteins was entirely based on mass spectrometry-based
proteomics data.
Table 1
List of Downregulated Proteins in
Mouse Brains Following EFV Treatment with Significance ≥20
and Fold Change ≥2
a
description
significance (−10 log
10
p
-value)
fold change (control/EFV-treated)
creatine kinase U-type
mitochondrial
106.9
2.5
sodium/potassium-transporting ATPase subunit alpha-1
91.9
2.4
triosephosphate isomerase
86.9
2.3
tubulin beta-3 chain
85.7
2.3
neurofilament medium
polypeptide
76.2
2.2
glycolipid transfer protein
51.5
2.5
eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4B
31.6
2.5
homer
protein homologue 1
28.1
2.5
fibronectin type III and SPRY domain-containing protein
1
25.1
3.8
fascin
25.1
2.1
astrocytic
phosphoprotein PEA-15
21.4
2.2
GTP-binding nuclear protein ran
20.1
2.1
a
The data are representative of three
independent experiments (
n
= 3; control and
n
= 3; EFV-treated).
The changes in expression and regulation of the above
proteins
such as triosephosphate isomerase, astrocytic phosphoprotein PEA-15,
and Na
+
/K
+
transporting ATPase subunit alpha-1
have been suggested to contribute to the neurologic dysfunction.
68
−
70
Similarly, degradation of neurofilament medium polypeptide and tubulin
beta-3 chain in the brain leads to neurodegeneration.
71
−
73
Moreover, homer proteins play important roles in regulating synaptic
plasticity and their degradation can cause neurological adverse effects.
74
The decreased level of creatine kinase U-type
mitochondrial suggests the aberrant energy metabolism in response
to EFV treatment. It is known that lipids play an important role in
energy storage in the brain. Therefore, the observation of alterations
of lipid localization, as well as creatine kinase U-type mitochondrial
indicates their correlation with each other. In addition, catalytic
activities of triosephosphate isomerase in glycolytic pathways are
intertwined with various metabolic processes, including lipid metabolism.
75
The glycolipid transfer proteins are known to
be involved in regulating the levels and distribution of sphingolipids,
and any dysregulation of these proteins may contribute to the altered
levels of lipids within different compartments in the brain.
76
Further, decreased levels of glycolytic enzymes
such as triosephosphate isomerase may yield clues for potential impairments
in synaptic plasticity. The observed differences in ceramide synthase
2 and acid ceramidase may suggest the dysregulation of the SM-Cer
pathway in the brain following EFV treatment. In the future, it would
be intriguing to investigate the roles of SM-Cer pathway proteins,
including ceramide synthase 2 and acid ceramidase in EFV-induced neurotoxicity.
One of the limitations of our current work is that we only used
female mice to investigate the EFV response on brain lipid metabolism.
Future work is required to determine whether there are any sexual
dimorphisms in brain lipid metabolism alterations following EFV treatment.
Further, it would be interesting to visualize the changes in protein
expression in different brain regions following EFV treatment. In
this regard, advanced protein imaging techniques such as immunohistochemistry
combined with MALDI MSI could be used to spatially visualize proteins,
including lipid metabolizing enzymes and lipid molecules (precursors
and metabolites) from a single tissue. Results from such studies may
provide a detailed understanding of the role of lipid metabolism in
drug responses.
Conclusions
In conclusion, high-resolution MALDI MSI
coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry revealed region-specific localization of several phospholipids
and sphingolipids in mouse coronal brain tissue sections. Importantly,
we visualized region-specific alterations of a range of PCs, SMs,
PI-Cers, and HexCers in the mouse brains following EFV treatment.
Additionally, bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomics data revealed
altered expression levels of lipid metabolizing enzymes, as well as
other proteins that have important roles in the brain function following
EFV treatment. Notably, we integrated our spatial tissue imaging data
with bottom-up proteomics results. Through this work, we have demonstrated
the application of high-resolution multiomics approaches to investigate
drug response in tissues. The dysregulation of various lipid molecules
in key brain regions may lead to the adverse effects associated with
EFV treatment. The results from our innovative multiomics study have
provided a detailed understanding of the effects of EFV response on
brain lipid metabolism and provide a strong basis for further research
on drug responses.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals and Reagents
For drug treatments, EFV was
purchased from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA). MALDI matrices,
DHB, α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 9-aminoacridine, and 1,5-diaminonaphthalene
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Lipid standards,
PC(32:0), PC(34:1), and SM(d18:1/18:0), were purchased from Avanti-Polar
Lipids Inc. (Alabaster, AL). All the solvents including methanol and
acetonitrile (LC–MS grade) were purchased from Fisher Scientific
(Hampton, NH) unless otherwise specified.
Animal Model, Antiretroviral Treatment, and Tissue Harvesting
Eight-week-old, female C57BL/6J mice (Jackson laboratories, Bar
Harbor, ME) were randomly divided into two groups; the control group
(
n
= 3) and the experimental (EFV-treated) group
(
n
= 3). Mice were housed and maintained in the Interdisciplinary
Life Sciences Building vivarium at the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County. All the experimental work performed in animals was approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University
of Maryland, Baltimore County. The experimental group received 20
mg/kg of EFV in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) while the control group only received vehicle intraperitoneally.
The EFV treatment was performed in mice for two time points; 12 and
24 h (drug or vehicle). For each time point, control (
n
= 3) and EFV-treated (
n
= 3) mice were euthanized
by suffocation with CO
2
. The intact brains were removed,
rinsed in cold PBS, immediately frozen by placing them in a weigh
boat over liquid nitrogen, and then stored at −80 °C until
analysis. Brain coronal sections (10 μm thickness) were obtained
by using a cryostat (Leica CM3050S, Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove,
IL) at −20 °C. For MALDI MSI, the sections from all experimental
(EFV-treated) and control mouse brains were mounted onto the same
indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated conductive glass slides (Bruker Daltonics,
Bremen, Germany) and stored at −80 °C until matrix application.
For mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 8–10 brain sections
(adjacent to the section mounted on slides) were collected from EFV-treated
(
n
= 3) and control group (
n
= 3)
into Eppendorf tubes and also stored at −80 °C until further
use. Our data revealed prominent lipid alterations at 24 h following
EFV treatment, therefore, all the results provided in this study are
from the brain tissues collected after 24 h of EFV treatment unless
otherwise specified.
Slide Scanning, Matrix Application, and Tissue Imaging
The slides with tissue sections were thawed and dried in a desiccator
for 20 min at room temperature. The optical images of brain tissue
sections were obtained using a standard flatbed scanner (Epson Perfection
V850 Pro). The matrix solution, 15 mg/mL DHB (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)
in a 90% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was sprayed on
the tissue sections using a TM-Sprayer (HTX Technologies, LLC, Chapel
Hill, NC) at 10 psi nitrogen gas pressure, with 125 μL min
–1
flow rate, 1200 mm/min nozzle velocity, and 3 mm
track spacing at a 60 °C spray nozzle temperature. Fourteen matrix
deposition cycles were employed for homogeneous matrix deposition.
MALDI MSI experiments were carried out using a rapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper
mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in positive
ion reflectron mode. This instrument was equipped with a smartbeam
3D laser (Nd:YAG laser, λ = 355 nm). The tissue regions were
defined using flexImaging (v. 6.0, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany)
software and the data acquisition was performed with flexControl (v.
4.2, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in the
m
/
z
range 500 to 1200 at 20 μm spatial resolution by
firing 200 laser shots per pixel at 66% laser energy. The instrument
was calibrated before the imaging experiment by using red phosphorus
spotted next to the tissue on the slide.
The imaging data were
recorded with flexImaging (v. 6.0, Bruker
Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), and further processing and analysis were
carried out with SCiLS Lab (v. 2024a Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen,
Germany). The multiple data sets (control and EFV-treated) were imported
to the same file in the SCiLS Lab, and feature finding was performed
by selecting 20 ppm interval width and TIC as a normalization. The
regions of interest in SCiLS Lab were defined by comparing the anatomy
of the tissue section with that from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas.
The ROC curves were generated to identify ions that discriminate between
control and EFV-treated mouse brains in the regions of interest. Additionally,
intensity box plots were generated to compare the abundance of selected
ions in regions of interest among the two groups.
Lipid Identification
An untargeted feature list obtained
from initial data analysis using SCiLS Lab was uploaded to the Lipid
Maps, and lipid search was performed by selecting a mass tolerance
of ±0.01
m
/
z
for positive polarity
([M + H]
+
, [M + Na]
+
, [M + K]
+
).
A custom-built lipid list from previously published literature was
also used to generate ion images. Lipid identification was performed
based on mass accuracy and on-tissue MS/MS analysis. On-tissue MS/MS
spectra were obtained by CID fragmentation of lipid molecules which
showed AUC (control/EFV) of either ≥0.7 or ≤0.3 from
ROC analysis. The on-tissue MS/MS data were compared with either MS/MS
data obtained from authentic lipid standards or MS/MS data reported
in the Human Metabolome Database. Moreover, the similar localization
of different adducts of the same species provided further support
to the identification.
Bottom-Up Proteomics Sample Preparation
The mouse brain
tissue sections collected from experimental (
n
=
3) as well as the control group (
n
= 3) were utilized
for mass spectrometry-based proteomics to investigate the alterations
in protein expression levels in response to EFV treatment. The sample
preparation was performed by utilizing the S-trap protocol (ProtiFi)
as previously described.
77
Briefly, protein
extraction was performed by adding 46 μL of 1× lysis buffer
[5% SDS in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)] which was then
reduced with 2 μL of 120 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and
incubated at 55 °C for 15 min. After cooling, 2 μL of 500
mM methylmethanethiosulfonate in isopropanol was added to alkylate
at room temperature. This step was followed by acidification with
5 μL 12% aqueous phosphoric acid. The protein samples were then
diluted by adding 350 μL of binding/wash buffer (100 mM TEAB
in 90% aqueous methanol) and transferred onto an S-Trap mini-column
followed by centrifugation at 10,000
g
for 1 min.
Subsequently, proteins were cleaned by washing three times with 400
μL of binding/wash buffer. Approximately 10 μg of trypsin
solution was employed on the S-trap column and incubated at 47 °C
for 90 min. The digested peptides were eluted stepwise with 80 μL
digestion buffer, 80 μL 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and 80 μL
acetonitrile in water. The eluted peptides were pooled and dried down
in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator 5301, Hamburg,
Germany).
Bottom-Up Proteomics Data Acquisition and Analysis
The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 20 μL 0.1% aqueous
formic acid and injected into a nano-HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics,
Bremen, Germany) onto a ReproSil C18 column (150 mm length, 0.75 mm
inner diameter with 1.9 μm particle size, and 120 Å pore
size). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min
at column temperature 50 °C. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid)
and phase B (5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) were employed with
the following gradient: 0–18 min, 5% B; 18–18.5 min,
30% B; and 18.5–21 min, 95% B. Thus, separated peptides were
analyzed on a trapped ion mobility quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operated
in parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Mass spectra
were collected within a scan range of
m
/
z
100 to 1700 in the positive ion polarity of the instrument. The
ion mobility value (1/
K
0
) was set at 0.85
to 1.30 V s/cm
2
.
The PEAKS studio (v. 10.6, Bioinformatics
Solutions Inc.) was used to process and analyze proteomics data and
performed searching against the
Mus musculus
protein database from Uniprot. PEAKS search was carried out using
a parent mass error tolerance of 30 ppm and fragment mass tolerance
of 0.05 Da. A feature-based LFQ was performed to investigate the changes
in expression levels of brain proteins in control and EFV-treated
samples. The following parameters were used for LFQ in PEAKS Studio:
20 ppm mass error tolerance, 3.0 min retention time shift tolerance,
and 0.05 ion mobility tolerance. Total ion count was used as a normalization
factor to normalize peptide peak intensities. Protein significance
≥20 and protein fold change ≥2 were selected to generate
a volcano plot.
Immunoblotting Analysis
Immunoblotting experiments
were performed as previously described.
77
,
78
Briefly, mouse
brain tissue sections, control (
n
= 3) and EFV-treated
(
n
= 3) were homogenized and lysed in cell lysis
buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA). A Pierce bicinchoninic
acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit was employed to quantify the protein
concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
A 4–15% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA) was used to separate proteins and were blotted
onto a nitrocellulose membrane after electrophoresis (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). After blocking the membranes with 5% nonfat dry
milk in tris-buffered saline with 0.1% tween 20 detergent for 1 h
at room temperature, the membranes were incubated with the following
antibodies separately overnight at 4 °C: anti-cPLA2 (Cell signaling
technology, Beverly, MA, USA), anticeramide synthase 2 (Bioss Inc.,
Woburn, MA, USA), antihistone H3 (Cell signaling technology, Beverly,
MA, USA), and antivinculin (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA). Next,
the membranes were incubated with antirabbit IgG HRP-linked secondary
antibody (Cell signaling technology, Beverly, MA, USA) for 1 h at
room temperature. Finally, membranes were visualized using chemiluminescent
substrate (Thermo Scientific) under ChemiDoc Imaging Systems (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA).
Histological Staining
H&E staining was performed
on the same tissue section after the MALDI MSI experiment according
to a previously published protocol with slight modifications.
79
The slide with tissues was gently rinsed with
70% ethanol for 30 s followed by 100% ethanol for another 30 s to
remove the chemical matrix. The staining was performed with hematoxylin
for 1 min followed by rinsing with deionized water for 10 s and subsequent
staining with eosin for 10 s. Finally, the stained tissues were rinsed
with xylene for 10 s and cover slipped. The H&E-stained tissue
sections were scanned using a flatbed scanner (Epson Perfection V850
Pro).