Introduction
The global impact of neurologic disease
is astounding, as it affects
every developmental stage and virtually all facets of life, including
movement, cognition, and the capacity for human connection. For these
reasons, substantial drug discovery efforts focus on developing small-molecule
therapeutics whose targets have implications in the prevention and
treatment of neurologic disease. Yet, even when putative therapies
with great clinical promise are identified, the blood brain barrier
(BBB) creates a major obstacle for central nervous system (CNS) penetration
that poses significant challenges in achieving pharmaceutical efficacy.
1
As such, understanding the mechanisms underlying
drug distribution in the brain is poised to have a wide-reaching impact
on millions of lives impacted by neurologic disease.
While endothelial
cells encompass the primary portion of the brain
microvasculature, the essentiality of the surrounding neurovascular
unit in maintaining appropriate BBB function cannot be ignored. Emerging
evidence demonstrates that pericytes and astrocytes are more than
support cells and play distinct roles from endothelial cells, without
which appropriate BBB function would not occur.
2
,
3
Even
still, understanding of pericyte and astrocytic contributions to the
BBB is primarily restricted to permeability and integrity. As such,
their capacity to contribute to CNS drug disposition has not been
widely considered. This limitation becomes even more apparent due
to the regional variability that exists at the BBB wherein diverse
anatomic sites have differential pericyte and astrocyte innervation
that is dynamically regulated.
4
The relative
contribution of endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes to regional
heterogeneity in CNS drug distribution remains unknown, the understanding
of which will be important to identifying mechanisms to target drug-specific
anatomic sites in the brain.
We aimed to address this question
by evaluating drug metabolizing
enzymes and membrane-associated transporters, as they are essential
for drug efficacy, biotransformation, elimination, and distribution
in tissues. These pharmacological pathways of drug metabolism and
transport are primarily characterized in peripheral organs, including
the liver, yet remain largely unknown at the BBB. Our study used antiretroviral
therapies (ART) primarily used for the prevention and treatment of
human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV) to probe this question, as they
are uniquely positioned to serve as an investigative model for CNS
drug disposition. The CNS represents one of the most challenging viral
sanctuaries for HIV as it invades the brain within two weeks of infection,
resulting in significant neurologic consequences in ∼50% of
people living with the virus.
5
,
6
Here, we used
the first-line nucleot(s)ide reverse transcriptase
inhibitors, tenofovir (TFV) and emtricitabine (FTC), to (1) evaluate
regional differences in drug distribution across the brain and (2)
elucidate differential drug transport and metabolizing capabilities
of brain endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes, which may serve
as a model of CNS drug disposition pathways that determine drug access
at the dynamic microenvironment of the BBB. With a combination of
in vivo studies in simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-infected and
ART-treated rhesus macaques and in vitro HIV exposure and ART treatments
of cell monocultures, we evaluated the capacity of each cellular component
of the BBB to uptake and convert TFV and FTC into their pharmacologically
active metabolites using a combination of liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry (LC–MS/MS), proteomics by mass spectrometry, and
drug transporter and metabolizing enzyme functional assays. Our findings
demonstrate that all cells at the BBB possess drug metabolizing and
transporting capabilities that can contribute to CNS drug bioavailability
and efficacy, which may inform pharmacodynamics, drug targeting, and
drug discovery. Further, our work indicates that the BBB is a dynamic,
pharmacologically active microenvironment that responds differentially
to disease and CNS small-molecule therapeutics in a cell-dependent
manner.
Results and Discussion
TFV and FTC Are Heterogeneously Distributed
among Brain Regions
and BBB Cell Types
It is well accepted that ART penetrates
the brain to a lesser extent than peripheral tissues. Previously,
ART cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measurements were used as surrogates
for brain concentrations.
7
However, measurements
within the brain demonstrated a lack of concordance with CSF concentrations.
8
,
9
These studies indicate that first-line ART drugs, TFV and FTC, are
CNS penetrant; however, the mechanisms at the BBB that facilitate
their entry into the brain and contribute to heterogeneous CNS distribution
remain poorly understood.
8
−
10
To address this, we obtained
brain from SIV-infected rhesus macaques that received a, once daily,
6-month ART regimen that included TFV and FTC and performed LC–MS/MS.
We focused on thalamus, frontal cortex, and cerebellum as HIV infection
of these brain regions is well characterized and the resultant neurologic
deficits that occur represent an important public health consideration.
11
,
12
We found that TFV concentrations were higher in all three tissues
relative to FTC, which was below the limit of quantification for all
brain regions except the thalamus (
Figure
1
A). Interestingly, TFV was heterogeneously
present in the brain, wherein it was 78% higher in the cerebellum
(0.0784 ± 0.0448 ng/mg) relative to the thalamus (0.0438 ±
0.0619 ng/mg) and 32% higher than the frontal cortex (0.0595 ±
0.0842 ng/mg).
Figure 1
TFV and FTC parent and metabolite quantification in BBB
cells and
rhesus macaque tissues. (A,B) The thalamus, frontal cortex (denoted
as F. Cortex), and cerebellum were sectioned from rhesus macaque brains
collected 200 days post inoculation with SIVmac251 followed by a subcutaneous
dose of 20 mg/kg TFV, 40 mg/kg FTC, and 2.5 mg/kg DTG administered
once daily. Within these brain tissues, (A) parent TFV and FTC as
well as (B) TFV-DP and FTC-TP metabolites were quantified by LC–MS/MS
from the cerebellum, frontal cortex, and thalamus (
n
= 2 macaques, represented as individual dots). (C) Astrocytes were
obtained from healthy rhesus macaques that received six months of
a once daily intramuscular ART administration (5.1 mg/kg TFV, 50 mg/kg
FTC, and 2.5 mg/kg DTG). Astrocytes were isolated from five macaque
brains (represented as individual dots), and TFV-DP and FTC-TP were
quantified by LC–MS/MS. Below limit of quantification (BLQ)
samples reported (represented as a singular dot) had concentrations
less than 5 fmol/sample (TFV-DP), 50 fmol/sample (FTC-TP), 0.05 ng/sample
(TFV), and 0.25 ng/sample (FTC). (D) Primary human BBB cells were
treated with 18 μM TFV, 2 μM FTC, and 6 μM DTG for
24 h at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
. After this time, TFV-DP and
FTC-TP were quantified by LC–MS/MS. Three to four independent
experiments were performed (represented as individual dots). Data
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis
was performed by 10.1.1 GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, using
Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA. *
p
< 0.05, **
p
< 0.01, ***
p
< 0.001, and ****
p
< 0.0001.
We next evaluated the
active metabolites of TFV
and FTC, TFV-diphosphate
(TFV-DP), and FTC-triphosphate (FTC-TP), respectively, by LC–MS/MS,
as these are the only versions of these drugs capable of suppressing
HIV (
Figure
1
B). TFV-DP
concentrations were 116% and 1134% higher in the cerebellum (55.60
± 47.80 fmol/mg) relative to the thalamus (25.75 ± 36.42
fmol/mg) and the frontal cortex (4.90 ± 6.92 fmol/mg), respectively,
suggesting that a differential capacity exists for pharmacologic activation
across brain regions (
Figure
1
B). Further, TFV-DP (55.60 ± 47.80 fmol/mg) was 2866%
higher than FTC-TP (1.94 ± 2.74 fmol/mg) in the cerebellum, highlighting
a differential accumulation of ART-active metabolites within brain
regions. Similar to that which occurred for its parent drug, FTC-TP
was below the limit of quantification for all brain regions except
the cerebellum. We did not detect TFV, FTC, or their active metabolites
in the brain obtained from untreated control rhesus macaques (data
not shown). Additionally, the variability in TFV and FTC parent and
metabolite measurements may be attributed to the interindividual differences
in antiretroviral drug concentrations that have been previously observed
between both rhesus macaques and humans.
13
−
15
Variability
in therapeutic measurements may also arise due to the interindividual
differences reported in SIV viral load, disease progression, and virus,
particularly for the SIVmac251 strain used in this study.
13
,
15
Together, our findings demonstrate that, overall, TFV had greater
CNS access than FTC. This is striking, as these therapies belong to
the same ART class and have similar molecular profiles, including
charge and molecular weight. Of importance, these in vivo findings
confirm our previous work using an in vitro model of the human BBB
indicating the relevance of this model as a tool in evaluating CNS
ART disposition.
16
Our current work confirms
that variable TFV and FTC concentrations occurred across brain regions,
consistent with evidence suggesting heterogeneous ART distribution
in the brain,
8
,
9
,
17
,
18
though this is an emerging area of investigation.
Specifically, our findings are consistent with the ART heterogeneity
observed in human and mouse brains but are distinct from other rhesus
macaque studies,
7
,
14
which may be attributed to differences
in study design, including viral strain, ART regimen, and dosing duration.
Further, we showed for the first time that this regional variability
extended to TFV and FTC active metabolites. We identified the highest
TFV and TFV-DP concentrations in the cerebellum, which is vulnerable
to HIV infection and damage.
19
Historically,
CSF measurements used to predict CNS ART concentrations suggested
increased FTC penetrance in the brain relative to TFV, which our findings
do not support.
20
,
21
Rather, our results further highlight
the disparity between CSF and brain tissue ART measurements and caution
against its use as a proxy for parenchymal concentrations.
20
,
21
These results continue to elucidate the differential distribution
of TFV and FTC within the CNS and, more importantly, the heterogeneous
measurement of their pharmacologically active metabolites across brain
regions.
TFV and FTC entry into the brain requires important
interactions
with the BBB. It remains unclear if, during these interactions, ART
is retained within the cells comprising the BBB, or if instead they
are transported in their entirety into the brain parenchyma. This
is particularly important as astrocytes and pericytes are permissive
to HIV and infection dysregulates their essential contributions to
BBB function.
22
,
23
While astrocyte uptake of TFV
and FTC is known, their intracellular accumulation of TFV-DP and FTC-TP,
and thus their antiretroviral therapeutic potential, has not been
evaluated previously.
24
,
25
To address this, we quantified
TFV-DP and FTC-TP in astrocytes isolated from the brain tissue of
uninfected rhesus macaques that received a, once daily, 6-month ART
regimen that included TFV and FTC (
Figure
1
C). We determined that TFV-DP was quantifiable
in astrocytes (15.76 ± 13.92 fmol/million) and that concentrations
were similar to reported EC90 for TFV measured in other cell types
from rhesus macaques.
26
In contrast and
consistent with our findings from the rhesus macaque brain tissue,
FTC-TP was below the limit of quantification in astrocytes (
Figure
1
C). No sex-based
differences occurred for astrocyte TFV and FTC quantification (data
not shown). We performed similar analyses on brain capillaries, containing
brain microvascular endothelial cells and pericytes, from these same
macaques. However, cell yields were too low to facilitate detectable
quantification (data not shown). Nevertheless, our rhesus macaque
measurements may indicate ART therapeutic potential in astrocytes,
which is essential to viral eradication of the brain as these cells
are infected by HIV and contribute to a persistent CNS reservoir.
27
,
28
We next performed in vitro TFV and FTC treatment for all three
cells comprising the BBB as we were unable to perform this comparative
analysis with rhesus macaques. Prior studies observed that TFV and
FTC accumulate intracellularly within endothelial cells, pericytes,
and astrocytes that result in differential cell-type-specific concentrations.
24
,
25
Although these findings suggest that BBB cells may have distinct
capabilities in accumulating TFV and FTC, prior studies did not evaluate
whether these cells were capable of TFV and FTC metabolism. To determine
whether BBB cells are capable of parent drug metabolism into TFV-DP
and FTC-TP, monocultures of primary human astrocytes, endothelial
cells, and pericytes were exposed to a regimen composed of rhesus
macaque equivalent ART doses for 24 h, after which time the cells
were lysed, and TFV-DP and FTC-TP concentrations were determined by
LC–MS/MS. In accordance with our previous findings, TFV and
FTC did not impact cell viability (data not shown).
16
Importantly, all BBB cells expressed cell-type-enriched
markers present in vivo, including VE-cadherin, Alanyl Aminopeptidase
(ANPEP), and Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) for endothelial
cells, pericytes, and astrocytes, respectively, confirming cell identity
(
Figure S1
). All BBB cell types demonstrated
the capability of metabolizing TFV and FTC into their active metabolites
(
Figure
1
D). However,
significant differential concentrations of TFV-DP and FTC-TP occurred
among the cells. TFV-DP was 113% (
p
= 0.0337) and
178% (
p
= 0.0220) higher in endothelial cells (6208
± 109.50 fmol/million) and pericytes (8092 ± 1482 fmol/million),
respectively, as compared to astrocytes (2913 ± 493.50 fmol/million)
(
Figure
1
D). Similar
differential concentrations occurred for FTC-TP, where pericytes (30,723
± 6220 fmol/million) possessed 804% and 476% higher intracellular
levels as compared to endothelial cells (3820 ± 409.60 fmol/million,
p
= 0.0203) and astrocytes (6447 ± 1587 fmol/million,
p
= 0.0133), respectively (
Figure
1
D). We also determined that some of the BBB
cells exhibited a preferential capacity to metabolize ART. Endothelial
cells had 62% higher TFV-DP (6208 ± 109.50 fmol/million) concentrations
compared to FTC-TP (3820 ± 409.60 fmol/million,
p
= 0.0094), while the converse occurred in pericytes that had 379%
higher FTC-TP (30,723 ± 6220 fmol/million) concentrations than
TFV-DP (8092 ± 1482 fmol/million,
p
= 0.0356)
(
Figure
1
D). Conversely,
there was no statistical difference in the intracellular concentrations
of TFV and FTC active metabolites in astrocytes (
Figure
1
D). Interestingly, we did not
detect FTC-TP in rhesus macaque astrocytes and were surprised to quantify
FTC-TP in human astrocytes in vitro. This finding suggests that astrocytes
possess the capacity to pharmacologically transform FTC into its active
metabolite should efficacious doses be achieved in the brain. While
the metabolism of TFV and FTC in BBB cells initially appears promising
for treating the brain during HIV, our findings raise concern for
the utility of nucleotide analogues as putative CNS therapies. Our
work suggests that local drug metabolism in endothelial cells, pericytes,
and astrocytes may limit drug availability in the brain parenchyma
by restricting it to cells at the BBB, as to our knowledge, there
are no known transporters for the negatively charged, high molecular
weight, and bulky TFV and FTC metabolites—suggesting that they
may be retained within these cells rather than being released into
the brain parenchyma.
BBB Cells Differentially Express TFV and
FTC Transporters and
Nucleotide-Metabolizing Enzymes
Efflux and influx transporters
are well-characterized determinants of brain drug distribution. TFV
and FTC are substrates of multiple influx and efflux transporters
that may influence the heterogeneous ART distribution we observed
in
Figure
1
. However,
understanding of the differential expression of drug transporters
among BBB cell types is limited, as most studies focused solely on
endothelial cells.
29
,
30
To address this gap, we evaluated
TFV and FTC efflux transporters Multidrug Resistance Protein (MRP)
1 (MRP1) and MRP4, as well as FTC influx transporters Equilibrative
nucleoside transporter 1 (ENT1), Organic Anion Transporter (OAT) 1
(OAT1), and OAT3, using proteomics by LC–MS/MS in primary human
BBB cell monocultures. Our studies also included primary human hepatocytes
as a comparative control as their transporter expression is well characterized
(
Figure
2
). Protein
expression was also evaluated by Western blotting (
Figure
2
).
Figure 2
BBB cells differentially
express TFV and FTC transporters and nucleotide-metabolizing
kinases. Primary human BBB cell monoculture and hepatocyte lysates
were processed for LC–MS/MS-based proteomics and protein concentrations
for (A) ENT1, (B) MRP4, and (C) MRP1 TFV/FTC transporters, (D) AK2,
(E) CKB, (F) PKLR, and (G) PKM TFV nucleotide-metabolizing kinases,
as well as (H) CMPK1, (I) DCK, (J) PGK1, and (K) TK1 FTC nucleotide-metabolizing
kinases, each with respective protein Western blots to confirm protein
abundance in BBB cells. Concentrations of proteins of interest were
measured by Proteomic Ruler. Four to five independent experiments
with two LC–MS/MS injection replicates each were performed
(represented as individual dots). Replicates with missing LC–MS/MS
values were omitted from the plot. >2 independent experiments with
missing values were reported as not reliably detected (ND) by proteomics
analyses. Data represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical
analysis was performed using Brown–Forsythe and Welch ANOVA
or Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA by GraphPad software. *
p
< 0.05, **
p
< 0.01, ***
p
< 0.001, and ****
p
< 0.0001.
We identified differential concentrations of ENT1
and MRP1 among
the BBB cell types (
Figure
2
A,C), while MRP4 concentrations were consistent (
Figure
2
B). Endothelial cells
had significantly higher ENT1 concentrations (239.9 ± 62.36 nM)
relative to pericytes (143.0 ± 52.64 nM,
p
=
0.0136) and astrocytes (103.3 ± 62.88 nM,
p
=
0.0019) (
Figure
2
A).
However, pericyte MRP1 concentrations (34.22 ± 6.90 nM) were
42% higher compared to astrocytes (23.99 ± 5.65,
p
= 0.0126) while remaining comparable to endothelial cells (29.48
± 9.90 nM,
p
= 0.6060) (
Figure
2
C). We did not detect TFV influx transporters,
OAT1 and OAT3, by LC–MS/MS-based proteomics; however, we previously
showed their expression in endothelial cells.
16
Western blot confirmed transporter expression in all of the BBB
cells. While we did not reliably quantify ENT1, MRP4, and MRP1 in
fresh primary human hepatocytes by proteomics (
Figure
2
A–C), it is accepted that they are
variably expressed in this cell type, likely explaining our inability
to reliably quantify these transporters by mass spectrometry-based
proteomics.
31
−
33
Nevertheless, we demonstrated that BBB cells differentially
expressed several TFV and FTC efflux and influx transporters, which
may explain their differential intracellular TFV and FTC accumulation.
16
,
24
,
25
Next, we evaluated the
nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes that facilitate
TFV and FTC metabolism to TFV-DP and FTC-TP. Adenylate kinase 2 (AK2),
Brain-type creatine kinase (CKB), Pyruvate kinase muscle (PKM), and
Pyruvate kinase (PK), liver, and red blood cell (PKLR) were differentially
quantifiable in BBB cells (
Figure
2
D–G). We determined that astrocytes (1626 ±
372.90 nM) expressed CKB approximately 3663% higher relative to endothelial
cells (44.39 ± 18.03 nM,
p
< 0.0001) and
2191% higher than pericytes (74.24 ± 14.69 nM,
p
< 0.0001), supporting previous findings (
Figure
2
E).
34
Additionally,
CKB concentrations were over 67% higher in pericytes (74.24 ±
14.69 nM) relative to endothelial cells (44.39 ± 18.03 nM,
p
= 0.0066) (
Figure
2
E). PKM concentrations were over 224% higher in pericytes
(5560 ± 1095 nM) relative to endothelial cells (2482 ± 1500
nM, p = 0.0022) (
Figure
2
G). As expected, CKM was not reliably detected in BBB cell types
as its expression is limited in the brain (data not shown).
10
Hepatocytes had minimal CKB and PKM concentrations
relative to those of all BBB cell types (
Figure
2
E,G).
Similar differential concentrations
of FTC-metabolizing enzymes
also occurred in the BBB cells (
Figure
2
H–K). Pericytes had greater than 71% Deoxycytidine
kinase (DCK) concentrations (232.1 ± 87.03 nM) relative to astrocytes
(135.0 ± 40.64 nM,
p
= 0.0160) and endothelial
cells (132.3 ± 52.88 nM,
p
= 0.0348) (
Figure
2
I). Interestingly,
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1) was most highly expressed in astrocytes
(3951 ± 1569 nM), which had 223% higher concentrations compared
to endothelial cells (1771 ± 1085 nM,
p
= 0.0391)
(
Figure
2
J). While
DCK and Thymidine kinase (TK1) were not reliably detected by LC–MS/MS-based
proteomics in hepatocytes, these cells had the highest Cytidine/uridine
monophosphate kinase 1 (CMPK1) and PGK1 concentrations relative to
BBB cells, supporting their known importance in liver glycolysis (
Figure
2
H–K).
35
,
36
Western blot confirmed BBB cell nucleotide-metabolizing enzyme expression.
Together, we determined that pericyte and astrocyte TFV and FTC nucleotide-metabolizing
enzymes are comparable to or significantly higher than endothelial
cells. For many nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes, BBB cell concentrations
were comparable to, or higher, than hepatocytes, indicating that these
cells hold competitive ART-metabolizing capabilities as the liver.
This was intriguing, as the brain is not typically regarded as a drug-metabolizing
organ. These results highlight that BBB cells harbor the biotransformation
machinery necessary to differentially metabolize TFV and FTC, identifying
it as a pharmacologically relevant microenvironment wherein drug metabolism
is a pertinent mechanism in determining CNS drug availability.
TFV and
FTC Transporters Are Differentially Active among BBB
Cells
Intrigued by the implications of the differential expression
of TFV and FTC transporters and nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes, we
evaluated whether this translated to distinct functional activity.
Substrates without overlapping specificity do not exist for ENT1,
MRP4, MRP1, OAT1, and OAT3, making it challenging to evaluate their
differential activity in our primary BBB cells. Therefore, we evaluated
the activity of additional efflux transporters known to interact with
ART: Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), MRP4, and P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) (
Figure
3
).
Importantly, while we did not reliably quantify BCRP and P-gp in our
BBB cell types with proteomics by LC–MS/MS, their expression
was confirmed with Western blot (
Figure
3
D,E).
Figure 3
TFV/FTC efflux transporters and nucleotide-metabolizing
kinases
are differentially active in BBB cells. Brain microvascular endothelial
cell, pericyte, and astrocyte monocultures were loaded with dyes for
(A) P-gp (rhodamine 123, 10 μM), (B) MRP4 (monobromobimane,
10 μM), and (C) BCRP (Hoechst 33342, 5 μg/mL) for 15 min
at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
. The dyes were allowed to efflux
out for 2 h at 37 °C and 5% CO
2
, after which flow
cytometry was performed to quantify intracellular fluorescence (mean
fluorescence intensity, MFI) as an indicator of efflux capacity. Statistical
analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA. (D) P-gp and (E) BCRP
expressions were confirmed by Western blot, as these proteins were
not reliably measurable by proteomics analyses. (F) Endogenous PK
and (H) TK activities were measured in primary human BBB cell monocultures
by a colorimetric activity assay and DiviTum activity assay, respectively.
Four to eight independent experiments (represented by individual dots)
were performed. Statistical analysis was performed using a Brown–Forsythe
and Welch ANOVA test. (G) TFV-DP formation in human primary BBB cell
lysates was measured by a CKB-mediated TFV metabolism assay using
LC–MS/MS. Cell lysates were incubated with TFV-monophosphate
(TFV-MP) and phosphocreatine (+CKB Substrates) or a mixture of phosphocreatine,
phosphoenolpyruvate, and ATP (+Phosphate Donors) for 30 min at 37
°C. The reaction was quenched by LC–MS-grade methanol,
and peak area of TFV-DP was measured by LC–MS/MS. Three to
five independent experiments were performed (represented by individual
dots). Statistical analysis was performed by using one-way ANOVA by
GraphPad software. *
p
< 0.05, **
p
< 0.01, ***
p
< 0.001, and ****
p
< 0.0001.
To evaluate efflux transporter
activity, primary
human BBB cell
monocultures were loaded with a fluorescent dye (monobromobimane for
MRP4, Hoechst 33342 for BCRP, and rhodamine 123 for P-gp) whose efflux
is known to be mediated by our transporters of interest according
to our established method.
16
We then measured
the remaining intracellular fluorescence after a sufficient time passed
to facilitate dye efflux. Importantly, the fluorescent dyes were not
toxic to the BBB cell types (
Figure S2C,I,O
), and all dye rapidly entered the viable cells, as indicated by
near 100% positivity for Hoechst 33342, rhodamine 123, and monobromobimane
(
Figure S2D–F,J–L,P,R
). Efflux
of all dyes occurred within two h, denoted by the significant loss
of intracellular fluorescence (
Figure S3
, black histograms compared to gray histograms).
We quantified
the efflux capacity of each transporter by subtracting
the difference in intracellular fluorescence, as indicated by the
mean fluorescence intensity, following dye uptake and efflux (
Figure S4
). We determined that P-gp and MRP4
efflux capacities differed across cell types (
Figure
3
A,B). Pericytes had the highest P-gp efflux
capacity (−24,671 ± 11,643) as it was 546% and 278% higher
than astrocytes (−4520 ± 2823,
p
= 0.0080)
and endothelial cells (−8879 ± 3060, p = 0.0296), respectively
(
Figure
3
A). In contrast,
pericytes had the lowest MRP4 efflux capacity (−9815 ±
3722) as it was 75% lower compared to astrocytes (−40,235 ±
18,231,
p
= 0.0095) and 69% lower than endothelial
cells (−32,143 ± 4880,
p
= 0.0462) (
Figure
3
B). P-gp and MRP4
efflux activities were comparable between endothelial cells and astrocytes.
Surprisingly, BCRP was the only efflux transporter for whom all BBB
cells had comparable efflux activity (
Figure
3
C). It is important to note the discordance
between efflux expression and activity among the BBB cells, demonstrating
the importance of evaluating the transporter function. Our work determined
that, while present, each BBB cell type expressed differentially active
TFV and FTC transporters, which may explain cell-based differences
in intracellular TFV and FTC accumulation.
16
,
24
,
25
These findings demonstrate the importance
of evaluating drug transport at the BBB, rather than viewing it as
an extension of the liver, as it possesses distinct mechanisms that
may contribute to differential drug disposition in the CNS. Additionally,
our results elucidate the importance of considering pericytes and
astrocytes, in addition to brain endothelial cells, in establishing
transport function at the BBB.
Astrocytes Have the Highest
CKB Activity, while TK and PK Are
Equally Active among All BBB Cell Types
We first evaluated
CKB activity through our TFV activation activity assay, which has
been previously used to measure CKB activity in tissues.
10
In this assay, protein lysates from BBB cell
monocultures were incubated for 30 min with the TFV-DP precursor,
TFV-MP, together with phosphocreatine that served as a phosphate donor
for the CKB-mediated conversion of TFV-MP to TFV-DP. To measure the
activity of all TFV-MP metabolizing enzymes, the (1) PKM phosphate
donor, phosphoenolpyruvate, (2) universal phosphate donor, ATP, and
(3) phosphocreatine were incubated with protein from BBB monoculture
lysates and TFV-MP. Peak areas of TFV-DP formed from the enzyme-catalyzed
reactions were measured in each BBB cell type for the CKB-mediated
conversion (+CKB substrate condition) and general TFV-MP conversion
(+Phosphate Donors) (
Figure
3
G). TFV-DP formation in the CKB-mediated reaction was over
3500% higher in astrocytes (120,921 ± 35714) as compared to endothelial
cells (3345 ± 1576,
p
= <0.0001) and pericytes
(4439 ± 1744,
p
= <0.0001) (
Figure
3
G). This also occurred for
TFV-DP formation in the general TFV-MP conversion, which was approximately
500% higher in astrocytes (79,229 ± 43,244) relative to endothelial
cells (15,616 ± 8159,
p
= 0.0009) and pericytes
(14,522 ± 2103,
p
= 0.0016) (
Figure
3
G). Of importance, no significant
difference occurred in the TFV-DP peak area between the CKB-mediated
reactions and the general TFV-MP conversion for all cell types, suggesting
that CKB may be the primary enzyme to metabolize TFV-MP to TFV-DP
at the BBB as no significant increase in TFV-DP occurred when adding
reaction substrates for other TFV-activating enzymes. Minimal background
from TFV-DP formation was observed in reactions where protein from
cell lysate was incubated with TFV-MP without any phosphate donor
added, demonstrating assay specificity (data not shown). Further,
TFV-DP formation was not detected in negative controls that excluded
assay substrates such as TFV-MP or BBB cell lysates (data not shown).
We next evaluated additional protein kinase activities. We measured
endogenous PK function, where activity was determined by pyruvate
and ATP formation from the PK-catalyzed reaction of phosphoenolpyruvate
and ADP. PK activity was comparable across endothelial cells, pericytes,
and astrocytes, though enzyme activity varied across experimental
replicates (
Figure
3
H). Next, we investigated the function of the FTC-metabolizing enzyme,
TK, using a DiviTum ELISA assay. TK endogenous activity was comparable
among all BBB cell types (
Figure
3
H). However, similar to PK activity, significant variability
occurred between measurements, particularly within astrocytes (
Figure
3
F). Our findings
demonstrate that while endogenous PK and TK activities are comparably
active among BBB cells, CKB involvement in catalyzing TFV-DP formation
occurs in a cell-type-specific fashion (
Figure
3
F,H,G).
HIV and ART Regulate TFV
and FTC Transporters and Nucleotide-Metabolizing
Enzymes in Astrocytes and Pericytes but Not in Endothelial Cells
There is a substantial impact of HIV, viral proteins, and ART on
the BBB; however, most studies focused primarily on BBB permeability
and integrity while not considering the components involved in ART
transport and metabolism.
37
,
38
To evaluate these processes
more comprehensively at the BBB in a condition more physiologically
relevant to people living with HIV, we evaluated whether ART or HIV
regulated TFV and FTC transporters and nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes.
To accomplish this, we treated our primary human BBB cell monocultures
with ART, HIV, combined HIV and ART, or vehicle for 24 h and performed
LC–MS/MS-based proteomics. We used HIV and ART concentrations
previously measured in vivo and commonly used in
in vitro
experiments (
Figure
4
).
25
Figure 4
BBB TFV/FTC nucleotide-metabolizing kinases
and transporters are
impacted in a cell-dependent manner by ART and HIV. Primary human
pericyte and astrocyte monocultures were exposed to ART (10 μM
TFV, 10 μM FTC, and 10 μM DTG), HIV (5 ng/mL), or HIV
+ ART (10 μM TFV, 10 μM FTC, 10 μM DTG, and 5 ng/mL
HIV) for 24 h at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
. Treatment with a vehicle
was used as a control. Pericytes and astrocytes were lysed and processed
for proteomics analyses. Concentrations of proteins of interest were
measured by Proteomic Ruler. After exposure, changes in protein concentration
were assessed in (A–G) astrocytes (astro) for (A) AK2, (B)
CMPK1, (C) ENT1, (D) P-gp, (E) PGK1, (F) MRP4, and (G) MRP1. Similarly,
changes in protein concentration were assessed in (H–L) pericytes
(per) for (H) CKB, (I) MRP4, (J) MRP1, (K) PGK1, and (L) TK1. The
significant changes (A–L) in the concentrations of TFV and
FTC transporters and metabolizing enzymes after ART, HIV, or HIV +
ART exposure relative to vehicle were (M) summarized for astrocytes
(astro) and pericytes (per). An arrow next to each protein denotes
an increase (upward arrow) or decrease (downward arrow) in protein
concentration after ART, HIV, or HIV + ART exposure relative to the
vehicle. Four independent experiments with two LC–MS/MS injection
replicates each were performed per condition (represented as individual
dots). Replicates with missing LC–MS/MS values were omitted
from the plot. >2 independent experiments with missing values were
reported as not reliably detected (ND) by proteomics analyses. Data
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis
was performed using Brown–Forsythe and Welch ANOVA or Kruskal–Wallis
ANOVA by GraphPad software. *
p
< 0.05, **
p
< 0.01, ***
p
< 0.001, and ****
p
< 0.0001.
We found that the concentrations
of several TFV
and FTC transporters
and nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes were significantly impacted by
24 h treatment. Strikingly, these changes occurred only in astrocytes
and pericytes but not endothelial cells. HIV, ART, and combined HIV
and ART treatment created distinct clustering of pericyte and astrocyte
proteomes (
Figure S5
). However, this did
not occur for endothelial cells, as they did not form separate clusters
(
Figure S5
). This biased impact of HIV
and ART was further confirmed as significant changes in TFV and FTC
transporter and nucleotide-metabolizing enzyme concentrations occurred
only in pericytes and astrocytes (
Figure
4
) but not in endothelial cells (
Figure S6
).
We therefore focused our efforts
on understanding the impact of
ART and/or HIV on pericytes and astrocytes. ART treatment significantly
decreased the concentration of AK2 (338.30 ± 94.74 nM,
p
= <0.0001) and MRP1 (13.38 ± 2.96 nM,
p
= 0.0028) by ∼50% in astrocytes, as well as CKB
(160.30 ± 15.04 nM,
p
= 0.0335) by 30% in pericytes
(
Figure
4
A,G,H). In
contrast, ART increased P-gp concentrations by 65% in astrocytes (28.60
± 7.35 nM,
p
= 0.0069) (
Figure
4
D). Next, we examined how HIV altered our
transporters and metabolizing enzymes of interest. After HIV exposure,
TFV and FTC nucleotide-metabolizing enzyme concentrations significantly
decreased for AK2 (477.70 ± 135.60 nM,
p
= 0.0356)
and PGK1 (1522 ± 194.20 nM,
p
= 0.0032) by ∼30%
in astrocytes (
Figure
4
A,E). In pericytes, HIV decreased PGK1 (2632 ± 233.50 nM,
p
= 0.0356) and TK1 (103.40 ± 9.30 nM,
p
= 0.0409) by 13% and 40%, respectively (
Figure
4
K,L). Interestingly, TFV and FTC transporter
concentrations increased after HIV exposure for MRP4 (36.02 ±
6.63 nM,
p
= 0.0314) by 45% and by 35% for MRP1 (31.22
± 3.61 nM,
p
= 0.0117) in astrocytes, but there
were no impacts on TFV/FTC transporter concentrations in pericytes
(
Figure
4
F,G,I,J).
Finally, we determined the combined impact of HIV and ART. Combined
HIV and ART treatment decreased AK2 and MRP1 concentrations relative
to vehicle concentrations only for astrocytes but not pericytes (
Figure
4
A,G). Interestingly,
astrocyte exposure to the combination of HIV and ART resulted in a
synergistic effect for CMPK1 and ENT1, where the concentrations of
these proteins changed only upon dual treatment, not with their individual
exposure (
Figure
4
B,C).
Astrocyte CMPK1 concentrations increased by 18% (719.0 ± 60.48
nM,
p
= 0.0448), while ENT1 concentrations decreased
by 70% (27.41 ± 5.89 nM,
p
= 0.0050) (
Figure
4
B,C). In contrast,
neither of these proteins were changed in pericytes with any treatment
condition (data not shown). The changes in astrocyte and pericyte
transporter and metabolizing enzyme concentrations after ART, HIV,
and a combination of HIV and ART exposure were summarized (
Figure
4
M). Taken together,
these data indicate that ART, HIV, and combination treatment may profoundly
impact the transport and metabolic capacity of the BBB, which occurs
by regulating pericytes and astrocytes but not endothelial cells and
may result in differential intracellular levels of ART and treatment
of HIV in the CNS (
Figure S6
). Consequently,
differentially regulated drug transport and metabolism at baseline
and in disease may impact heterogeneous CNS drug distribution and
efficacy. Further, there is a protein-specific manner for which exposure
to HIV, ART, or a combination of HIV and ART selectively regulates
proteins involved in TFV and FTC transport and metabolism.
ART and
HIV Modulate Astrocyte and Pericyte Cell Transport and
Regulation, Metabolism, Immune Response, and Cell–Cell Communication
Pathways
While we focused primarily on TFV and FTC transporters
and metabolizing enzymes, we also recognize that HIV and ART impact
additional cellular functions at the BBB as the BBB responds dynamically
to disease that may lead to dysregulation—thereby exacerbating
neurologic injury and dysfunction—and may influence ART CNS
availability. So, we next evaluated pharmacologically related cellular
pathways that may contribute to the transporter and metabolizing enzyme
concentration changes we observed (
Figure
4
) following HIV, ART, and combination treatment.
We used SimpliFi to accomplish this by further processing and analyzing
the BBB proteomes to identify additional cellular pathways of interest.
We identified several proteins as significantly impacted by HIV or
ART exposure (
p
< 0.05), relative to the vehicle.
To summarize and organize these findings, we further filtered differentially
expressed proteins such that the log2 fold change within affected
pathways of interest relative to the vehicle was greater than 0. We
found that the resulting top hits in both astrocytes and pericytes
(
p
< 0.05, log2 fold change >0) were pathways
involved in (1) drug transport and cell regulation, (2) drug metabolism,
(3) immune response and signaling, (4) cell–cell communication,
and (5) HIV pathogenesis (
Figure
5
). Astrocytes are actively infected by HIV, and thus,
we were not surprised to identify several pathways implicated in immune
responses and signaling and HIV pathogenesis in HIV-exposed astrocytes
(
Figure
5
A,C).
27
Pericytes are also permissive to HIV, and we
observed pathway hits involved in host interactions for HIV pathogenesis
and immune response and signaling after exposure to HIV, ART, and
a combination of HIV and ART, which were characterized by a mixture
of proteins that were both upregulated and downregulated (
Figure
5
D–F).
39
Pathway analysis of astrocytes and pericytes
identified significant pathway hits involved in ART metabolism and
transport, as well as glucose metabolism, cell regulation, cell cycle,
and cell signaling after exposure to HIV, ART, and combination treatment.
These pathway hits may contribute to the changes we previously observed
(
Figure
4
) in transporter
and metabolizing enzyme concentrations after HIV and ART exposure
as these same proteins are involved in many of the affected pathways
(
Figure
5
). The significant
changes in BBB cell pathways involved in drug metabolism and transport
after exposure to HIV, ART, and combination treatment may further
impact the CNS drug disposition in the context of disease. This highlights
the importance of further investigating these pathways that may contribute
to the dynamic pharmacological nature of BBB cells (
Figure
5
). Similar to that which occurred
for TFV and FTC transport and metabolizing proteins, endothelial cell
exposure to HIV, ART, and combined HIV and ART treatment had minimal
impact in these pathways (
Figures S6K,L,M
). This was unexpected as previous studies reported changes in brain
endothelial cell pathways, such as transport, after exposure to ART
or the HIV protein, tat.
38
,
40
,
41
The disparity in our findings may occur due to our use of clinically
relevant concentrations of ART and using replication competent HIV,
rather than a viral protein. We propose that evaluation of CNS drug
disposition occurs not only in baseline conditions but also in the
diseased state, as the fundamental physiology of the BBB, including
drug transporters and metabolizing enzymes, differs during pathology,
effectively shaping CNS drug availability.
Figure 5
HIV and ART differentially
impact astrocyte and pericyte cell pathways
involved in cell transport and regulation, metabolism, immune response
and signaling, and cell–cell communication. Primary human pericyte
and astrocyte monocultures were exposed to ART (10 μM TFV, 10
μM FTC, and 10 μM DTG), HIV (5 ng/mL), or HIV + ART (10
μM TFV, 10 μM FTC, 10 μM DTG, and 5 ng/mL HIV) for
24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO
2
. Treatment with the vehicle
was used as a control. Pericytes and astrocytes were lysed and processed
for proteomics analyses. Pathways significantly altered in astrocytes
after (A) HIV, (B) ART, and (C) HIV + ART exposure as well as in pericytes
after (D) HIV, (E) ART, and (F) HIV + ART (relative to the vehicle)
were analyzed by SimpliFi proteomics software. Pathways of interest
were filtered by pathway changes greater than one log fold and hypergeometric
p
-value <0.05. Pathway hits of interest were ranked by
–log10 (hypergeometric p-value) calculated by SimpliFi statistics.
Pathway analyses reflect four independent experiments per condition
with two LC–MS/MS injection replicates each.
In summary, first-line ART drugs, TFV and FTC,
were evaluated as
representative models of CNS-penetrant small-molecule drugs with significant
disease relevance to determine mechanisms at the BBB that may govern
heterogeneous CNS drug disposition. We establish a foundation regarding
BBB cells as pharmacological entities that form the dynamic BBB microenvironment
and may determine CNS drug access, as they possess machinery to differentially
transport and metabolize CNS-penetrant drugs. Our findings provide
evidence of dynamic pharmacological capabilities of metabolism and
transport within BBB cells and provide further considerations of region-specific
differences in CNS drug metabolism, transport, and distribution. Additionally,
our results highlight that mechanisms of drug transport and metabolism
at the BBB may be impacted by therapeutic intervention and disease,
which may influence the CNS drug disposition.
Methods
Cell Lines
Primary human astrocytes (ScienCell Research
Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) and brain microvascular endothelial cells
were cultured as described previously.
16
Astrocytes were used at passages 1–6 for all experiments,
and endothelial cells were used at passages 2–12 for all experiments.
Information on donor including sex and age was not available from
source.
Primary human pericytes (ScienCell Research Laboratories)
were grown to confluence on 1.5% poly-
l
-lysine-coated flasks
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in Pericyte Medium (ScienCell Research Laboratories),
containing HEPES and sodium bicarbonate buffered to pH 7.4. Media
were supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (ScienCell Research
Laboratories), 1% penicillin–streptomycin 10,000 U/mL (Gibco,
Grand Island, NY), and 1% pericyte growth supplement (ScienCell Research
Laboratories). Pericytes were used at passages 2–13 for all
experiments. Information on donor including sex and age was not available
from source.
Fresh primary human hepatocytes (BioIVT, Westbury,
NY) were purchased
in a liquid suspension and isolated from a deceased Caucasian biological
female, age 66 with a healthy medical background.
Animals
Four male and three female rhesus macaques
(
Macaca mulatta
), all four years old,
were included in this study. Rhesus macaques were selected by prescreening
negative for the immunoprotective MHC class I alleles
Mamu-A*01
,
Mamu-B*08
, and
Mamu-B*17
. All
rhesus macaques were approximately 6 kg throughout the study and when
tissues were harvested. All protocols were performed at The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine and Emory University School
of Medicine in compliance with the guidelines of the Animal Care and
Use Committees, the US Department of Agriculture Animal Welfare Act,
and the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Rhesus
Macaque Experimental Design
We used a well-established
rhesus macaque (
Macaca mulatta
) model
7
,
14
,
42
using samples from two cohorts.
The first cohort involved two SIV-infected, ART-treated rhesus macaques
(M1 and M2) and one healthy, ART untreated rhesus macaque (M3) that
were inoculated intravenously using SIVmac251 as previously described.
43
At day 42 post infection, a subcutaneous dose
of 2.5 mg/kg dolutegravir (DTG, ViiV, London, England, UK), 20 mg/kg
TFV (Gilead, Foster City, CA), and 40 mg/kg FTC (Gilead) was administered
once daily for six months. Euthanasia occurred at approximately 200
days postinoculation. The second cohort involved five uninfected,
ART-treated rhesus macaques (M4–M5, F1–F3). ART administration
and euthanasia occurred in the same manner as described for cohort
one animals, except an intramuscular dose of 2.5 mg/kg dolutegravir
(DTG, ViiV), 5.1 mg/kg TFV (Gilead), and 50 mg/kg FTC (Gilead) was
used.
Primary Rhesus Macaque Astrocyte Isolation
To isolate
rhesus macaque astrocytes, blood vessels were surgically removed from
three female and two male rhesus macaque whole brain sections, washed
with 1× phosphate buffered saline (Gibco), and digested for 30
min at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
with a trypsin solution containing
10% of 2.5% trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Digested
brain tissue was filtered twice using 183 μm sterile mesh (Corning,
Corning NY) and a 100 μm nylon cell strainer (Corning) in 10%
DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting brain capillaries were
removed from the 100 μm nylon cell strainer (Corning) and lysed
in 70% LC–MS-grade methanol for mass spectrometry analyses.
Astrocytes were then isolated using a density gradient containing
Percoll (Thermo Fisher Scientific), filtered through a 40 μm
nylon cell strainer (Corning), and washed with DMEM-10 supplemented
with 15% FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.1% Geneticin (Thermo Fisher
Scientific), and 100 mM sodium pyruvate. Isolated astrocytes were
lysed in 70% LC–MS-grade methanol. Proteomics by mass spectrometry
was used to authenticate isolated astrocytes.
Immunofluorescent Microscopy
Primary brain endothelial
cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were seeded (1.6 × 10
4
cells/dish) on 35 mm ibiTreat dishes (Ibidi USA, Madison, WI). ibiTreat
dishes were coated with 0.2% gelatin and 1.5% poly-
l
-lysine
prior to seeding brain endothelial cells and pericytes, respectively.
Cells were fixed, stained, and imaged as described previously.
16
Cells were probed with antibodies with specificity
to GFAP (53-9892-82, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), VE-Cadherin (14-1449-82,
Invitrogen), or ANPEP (MA5-32226, Invitrogen) overnight at 4 °C,
washed three times with DPBS at room temperature, and probed with
the appropriate Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated secondary antibody (ab97051
and A-11001, Abcam, Cambridge, MA) for 1 h at room temperature. 10–20
representative images were acquired for each cell type 1–15
days postfixation using the Echo Revolution (San Diego, CA) in inverted
mode with a 20× Plan Apo objective, with 0.8 numerical aperture.
Channels used included blue for cell nuclei, red for cell morphology,
and green for proteins of interest. Prior to image acquisition, the
focal plane on the
Z
-axis was determined manually,
and exposure time and light intensity were adjusted to optimize signal-to-noise
ratio and avoid saturation.
ART Intracellular Concentration Determination
Upon
reaching 90% confluency, endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes
were treated with TFV (18 μM), FTC (2 μM), DTG (6 μM),
or vehicle, for 24 h at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
(TFV, FTC, and
DTG were all from Toronto Research Chemicals, Toronto, Canada). TFV
and FTC were prepared in a 100 mM stock solution in sterile water,
while DTG was diluted in DMSO together with sterile water. All subsequent
dilutions of DTG were made in sterile water, and the final concentration
of DMSO was less than 0.1%. Of note, ART concentrations reflect the
approximate equivalent concentrations of the macaque ART dosing regimens
used in this study.
In vitro ART-treated brain endothelial cells,
pericytes, and astrocytes as well as rhesus macaque brain tissue and
isolated astrocytes were lysed in 70% LC-MS-grade methanol. FTC, TFV,
FTC-TP, and TFV-DP were quantified in collaboration with the Clinical
Pharmacology Analytic Laboratory at The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine as previously described.
44
,
45
Each experimental
replicate of endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes includes
data collected from three to four independent experiments. Experimental
replicates for astrocytes isolated from rhesus macaques were collected
from five independent animals. Lastly, each experimental replicate
for ART-treated rhesus macaque brain includes data collected from
two independent animals.
Western Blot
Endothelial cells,
pericytes, and astrocytes
were lysed with 1× RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers,
MA) supplemented with a 1× protease/phosphatase inhibitor (Cell
Signaling Technology). Total protein concentrations were determined
by Bradford Assay with the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye reagent concentrate
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Western blots were performed as previously described.
16
Blots were probed with antibodies with specificity to BCRP
(NBP2-22124, Novus Bio, Centennial, CO), P-gp (PA5-61300, Invitrogen),
MRP4 (12705, Cell Signaling Technology), MRP1 (Ab24102, Abcam), ENT1
(PA5-116451, Invitrogen), PGK1 (PA5-28612, Invitrogen), AK2 (11014-1-AP,
Proteintech, Rosemont, IL), CKB/CKM (15137-1-AP, Proteintech), TK
(15691-1-AP, Proteintech), CMPK (11360-1-AP, Proteintech), DCK (17758-1-AP,
Proteintech), PKM1 (15821-1-AP, Proteintech), and PKLR (2456-1-AP,
Proteintech), overnight at 4 °C, washed with TBS-T, and probed
with the appropriate secondary antibody (ab97023 and Ab97051, Abcam)
for 1 h at room temperature. All antibodies were used at concentrations
recommended by the manufacturer. Western Lightning Plus-ECL (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA) was used as a chemiluminescence substrate, and the signal
was detected with the Azure Biosystems c600 Imager (Azure Biosystems,
Dublin, CA). As a loading control, membranes were stripped with Restore
Plus Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
reprobed with antibody against β-Actin HRP (8H10D10, Cell Signaling
Technology) for 1 h at room temperature.
BBB Monoculture Proteomics
by LC–MS/MS
Endothelial
cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were lysed with a 1× proteomics
lysis buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Invitrogen)
and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma). Cell lysates were
processed for proteomics by mass spectrometry and analyzed as previously
described
10
with the exception that proteins
were digested into peptides using the S-Trap micro spin columns (ProtiFi,
Fairport, NY) and desalted using the Pierce peptide desalting spin
columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Resulting spectra were uploaded to Spectronaut 18.7
(Biognosys, Cambridge, MA). Peptides were identified and quantified
using the directDIA analysis default settings with the proteotypicity
filter set to “Only Proteotypic” and a “methylthio”
variable modification. MS1 protein group quantifications, UniProt
numbers, and molecular weights from Spectronaut (Biognosys) were imported
into Perseus (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg-Martinsried,
Bavaria, Germany) for use of the Proteomic Ruler plug-in, as previously
described.
46
The default proteomic ruler
plug-in settings were used for the hepatocytes. To account for differences
in cell size, the total cellular protein concentration for endothelial
cells, pericytes, and astrocytes was set to 100 g/L as a conservative
estimate according to previous studies.
47
The scaling mode and ploidy were set to the default proteomic ruler
plug-in settings. Protein concentrations (nM) and copy numbers, as
estimated by the Proteomic Ruler, were used for analysis. Proteins
were reported as “not reliably quantified or detected (ND)”
by proteomics when one or less unique peptide was identified for the
corresponding protein. Protein relative abundances and Proteomic Ruler
concentrations and copy numbers of all identified proteins were made
publicly available in The Human Blood Brain Barrier Monoculture Proteome
Repository 1.0.2 (
https://hannahwilkins.shinyapps.io/Blood_Brain_Barrier_Cells_Proteomics_Repository_Publish/
). Proteomics raw data can be directly accessed at massive.ucsd.edu
as data set MSV000094702 using the password: WilkinsBBB.
In Vitro CKB-Mediated
TFV Enzyme Activity Assay
Primary
human endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were lysed at 100%
confluency with an assay reaction buffer containing 75 mM HEPES pH
7.5 (Gibco), 5 mM MgCl
2
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50
mM KCl (Sigma), 2 mM dithioerythritol (Sigma), and LC–MS-grade
H
2
O (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Activity assay reactions
were performed as previously described.
10
Control reactions were performed in parallel by omitting the addition
of initiation buffer, cell lysate, or TFV-MP. Independent experimental
assay reactions were completed for endothelial cells (
n
= 3–5), pericytes (
n
= 4), and astrocytes
(
n
= 4–5).
TFV-DP formation was measured
by triple quadrupole LC–MS/MS as previously described,
10
with the exception that samples were analyzed
on an Agilent Ultivo Triple Quadrupole LC/MS (Agilent, Santa Clara,
CA). Mobile-phase A was 5 mM
N
,
N
-dimethylhexylamine (DMHA) (Sigma) in water at pH 7.0, and mobile-phase
B was 5 mM DMHA in 50% acetonitrile/50% water (v/v). Analytes were
separated on a Halo C18 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 2.1 μm,
Mac-Mod Analytical) (Mac-Mod Analytical, Chadds Ford, PA) at a flow
rate of 0.450 mL/min using the following gradient: 5% B from 0 to
1 min, 5%–45% B from 1 to 9 min, 45% B from 9 to 13 min, 45%–100%
B from 13 to 15 min, 100% B from 15 to 20 min, 100%–5% B from
20 to 23 min, and 5% B from 23 to 30 min. Analytes were ionized by
heated electrospray ionization with a capillary voltage of 4800 V,
gas temperature of 260 °C, gas flow rate of 11.0 L/min, and nebulizer
pressure of 30 psi. Chromatographic peak areas were used for relative
comparisons of the metabolite abundance.
Efflux Transporter Activity
Assay and Flow Cytometry
Efflux transporter activity was
determined by measuring intracellular
fluorescence following uptake of rhodamine 123 (10 μM, Thermo
Fisher Scientific), Hoechst 33342 (5 μg/mL, Thermo Fisher Scientific),
and monobromobimane (10 μM, Thermo Fisher Scientific), fluorescent
substrates with specificity for P-gp, BCRP, and MRP4, respectively.
Hoechst 33342 is a well-established transport substrate of BCRP; however,
evidence exists that there is substrate specificity overlap with P-gp,
which may contribute to mixed efflux effects.
48
We did not observe intracellular trapping of monobromobimane or
oxidative stress to induce cell death (data not shown).
Primary
human brain endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were seeded
onto six-well plates at 0.3 × 10
6
cells/well. Upon
reaching 100% confluency, cells were incubated with each fluorescent
substrate for 15 min at 37 °C, 5% CO
2
to allow uptake
into the cell, after which fresh media were added, and the fluorescent
substrates were allowed to efflux from the cells for 2 h at 37 °C,
5% CO
2
. Addition of the fluorescent substrate for 15 min
at 37 °C and 5% CO
2
that was not permitted to efflux
was used as a positive control to determine maximal substrate uptake.
Following exposure to the fluorescent substrates, cells were washed
with PBS (Gibco), filtered using BD FACS tubes (BD Biosciences, Franklin
Lakes, NJ) with cell strainer caps with 35 μm pores (BD Biosciences),
and immediately subjected to flow cytometric acquisition where at
least 10,000 singlet events were acquired with a BD LSRFortessa cytometer
and Diva software version 9 on the Windows 10 platform (BD Biosciences).
Flow cytometric data were analyzed using FlowJo version 10.9 (FlowJo,
Ashland, OR) where fluorescence intensity of substrates in cells that
received substrate for 2 h (efflux) was subtracted from the cells
that received substrate at the end of the 2 h (uptake) to quantitate
efflux capacity.
Cell Viability Determination
Brain
endothelial cells,
pericytes, and astrocytes were exposed to rhodamine 123 (10 μM,
Thermo Fisher Scientific), Hoechst 33342 (5 μg/mL, Thermo Fisher
Scientific), and monobromobimane (10 μM, Thermo Fisher Scientific)
for 15 min and 2 h, after which time viability was assessed, as previously
described,
16
using the BD Horizon Fixable
Viability Stain 520 (BD Biosciences). Heat shock at 55 °C for
10 min served as a positive control for cell death. The cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry within 5 min of staining.
TK Activity
Assay
When 100% confluent, endothelial
cell, pericyte, and astrocyte monoculture cells were lysed with DiviTum
TK activity lysis buffer (Biovica International, San Diego, CA). To
determine TK activity, the DiviTum (Biovica International) TK activity
assay was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions,
as previously described.
49
The absorbance
readings to DiviTum units per liter (Du/L) were converted using the
values from standards with known TK activity, with a working range
from 20 to 4000 Du/L. TK activity was reported as the DiviTum TK activity
value (DuA) per total protein (μg). The assays were performed
at the Biovica laboratory in San Diego, California, and investigators
were blinded to the cell type. TK activity was normalized to individual
protein amount in brain endothelial cell, pericyte, and astrocyte
lysates as measured by the Pierce Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo
Fisher Scientific).
PK Activity Assay
PK activity was
determined using
the pyruvate kinase activity assay kit (Abcam) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. When 100% confluent, primary human brain endothelial
cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were lysed using cold PK assay buffer,
diluted, and analyzed by a colorimetric assay where the absorbance
of the oxidized pyruvate was measured at 570 nm at 25 °C. Absorbance
readings were taken by a Synergy HT microplate reader (BioTek, Winooski,
VT) every minute for 20 min. PK activity was calculated using the
concentration of pyruvate from the pyruvate standard curve generated
in the assay over 20 min. PK activity was normalized to individual
protein amounts in brain endothelial cell, pericyte, and astrocyte
lysates as measured by the Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
BBB Cell HIV and ART Exposure
Upon reaching 90% confluency,
primary human endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes were washed
with PBS (Gibco) and treated with ART, including TFV (Toronto Research
Chemicals), FTC (Toronto Research Chemicals), DTG (Toronto Research
Chemicals), HIV
ADA
(5 ng/mL) (National Institutes of Health),
ART in combination with HIV, or vehicle for 24 h at 37 °C, 5%
CO
2
. All treatments were constituted in cell culture media.
Final ART concentrations were 10 μM, which reflects the maximum
serum concentrations (
C
max
) of drug obtained
from clinical studies.
24
Following treatment,
cells were washed twice with PBS (Gibco) and lysed in 1X proteomics
lysis buffer, containing 5% SDS (Invitrogen) and 50 mM triethylammonium
bicarbonate (Sigma). Cell lysates were processed for proteomics as
described above.