Introduction
In the realm of biological research, mass
spectrometry (MS)-based
proteomics is indispensable for the identification, quantification,
and characterization of proteins that play key roles in maintaining
physiological cellular functions.
1
−
4
Bottom-up proteomics is the workhorse for
MS-based proteomics, constituting a well-defined multistep process
that integrates various methodologies and instrumentation.
5
,
6
The process can be broadly categorized into three main steps: sample
preparation, liquid chromatography/tandem MS (LC–MS/MS) analysis,
and database search.
7
The characteristics
and limitations of each step in the proteomic process significantly
influence the data quality. Because errors and biases introduced during
the initial sample preparation step can propagate throughout the entire
experiment,
8
,
9
the success of bottom-up proteomics depends
upon optimal and consistent sample preparation.
Purifying and
concentrating digested proteins is a key part of
the sample preparation process, with solid-phase extraction (SPE)
being the mainstream technique.
10
−
12
SPE involves either centrifugation
or vacuum suction through hydrophobic reversed-phase (RP) materials,
employing alternating mobile phases for the trapping, washing, and
elution steps. This process, often referred to as ’desalting,’
primarily aims to remove buffer salts.
13
These salts can interfere with the ionization process and reduce
the lifespan of the analytical system. The Stop-and-Go Extraction
Tip (StageTip) is one of the most common microcolumns utilized as
an offline desalting system, comprising a small disk of hydrophobic
particles entangled in a Teflon mesh within a pipet tip.
14
,
15
In contrast to online systems, StageTip offers the advantage of
circumventing limitations imposed by the size and characteristics
of trap columns and downstream analytical columns. Furthermore, StageTip
can process multiple peptide samples simultaneously, thereby minimizing
sample preparation time. StageTip can also prevent the carryover of
peptides into LC–MS/MS due to the disposable format.
Recent advancements in this field include in-StageTip
16
,
17
and the On-microSPE method
18
,
19
utilizing StageTips
as solid-phase reactors throughout the sample preparation process,
covering steps from cell lysis to peptide purification. These approaches
effectively minimize contamination and sample loss in the overall
workflow. Another advancement is the Evosep One system, which seamlessly
integrates StageTip directly into the downstream LC–MS/MS workflow.
20
,
21
This integration is designed to increase throughput and robustness,
especially in applications related to single-cell proteomics and clinical
proteomics. Nevertheless, the desalting step still poses a significant
challenge, with the risk of losing peptide samples due to inadequate
retention or irreversible adsorption onto hydrophobic RP materials.
22
,
23
Traditionally, hydrophobic ion-pair reagents
24
,
25
or chemical modifications of peptides
26
−
28
have been employed to
improve the peptide retention on RP materials. However, these chemical
approaches may have the drawback of reducing MS sensitivity, owing
to a decline in electrospray ionization efficiency
29
−
31
or peptide
losses within the complex workflow.
32
,
33
Porous graphite
carbon (PGC) has been used as a hydrophobic RP material to enhance
the recovery of hydrophilic peptides through strong hydrophobic and
π interactions.
34
−
37
However, the overly strong intermolecular interactions with PGC
resulted in loss of hydrophobic peptides.
37
,
38
We previously introduced CoolTip, where the recovery efficiency
of hydrophilic peptides was increased by cooling the StageTip during
the desalting step.
39
Still, there appeared
to be significant potential for improvement in the material design
of StageTip to further enhance sensitivity and coverage in MS-based
proteomics.
Here, we present a unique hybrid polymer designed
to improve the
performance of StageTip. The polymer was synthesized by thermally
kneading commercially available hydrophobic particles of styrene-divinylbenzene
copolymer (St-DVB) into ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA) thermoplastic
resin. The EVA forms a flexible sponge-like monolithic carrier with
μm-sized through-pores (SPongy Monolith; SPM), functioning simultaneously
as the column material and frit.
40
−
42
The through-pores facilitate
low-pressure chromatographic separation, ensuring the efficient processing
of biological samples without clogging. The St-DVB particles embedded
in the surface of the monolithic carrier enhance peptide retention
through strong hydrophobic interaction. A pipet tip containing this
hybrid polymer, named ChocoTip (CHrOmatographic particles COated by
a Thermoplastic polymer Immobilized in Pipette tip), was developed
to address the sample loss issues in conventional StageTip methods.
The simplicity and outstanding peptide recovery efficiency of ChocoTip
suggest its potential suitability as a universal platform for peptide
purification in ultrasensitive proteomics applications.
Materials and Methods
Materials
UltraPure Tris Buffer was purchased from
Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Sequencing-grade modified
trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). Water was purified
by a Millipore Milli-Q system (Bedford, MA). Empore SDB-XC disks and
InertSep PLS-2 were purchased from GL Sciences (Tokyo, Japan). Polyethylene
frit was purchased from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA). Protease
inhibitors were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Blunt-end
16- or 17-gauge syringe needles were purchased from Hamilton (Reno,
NV). 200 μL pipet tips were purchased from Gilson (Middleton,
WI) and used for the preparation of StageTips. All other chemicals
and reagents were purchased from Fujifilm Wako (Osaka, Japan) unless
otherwise specified.
Preparation of SPM-tip and ChocoTip
SPM-tip and ChocoTip
were prepared in a similar manner to the previously reported method.
40
,
41
Briefly, 37 wt % of polyolefin chips containing 15% vinyl acetate,
55 wt % of pore templates (pentaerythritol), and 8 wt % of auxiliary
pore templates (poly(oxyethylene/oxypropylene) triol) were blended
at 130 °C and homogeneously kneaded.
40
,
41
For ChocoTip, St-DVB particles (mean particle diameter; 70 μm)
were added at 20 wt % to SPM during the kneading step.
42
,
43
The resulting material was extruded at 130 °C, and the resulting
string-shaped material was immediately cooled in water for solidification.
The product was washed with water using ultrasonication to remove
water-soluble compounds. The porosity of the obtained hybrid material
was about 75% and the diameter of the cross-section across its entire
length was 1.5 mm. The string-shaped material was then sliced at intervals
of 2.0 mm (SPM pellets). Due to the elasticity of the SPM, the packing
procedure is simple (
Figure
1
a). The pellets were immersed in water and thoroughly wetted,
and pushed straight into the 200 μL pipet tip using a 17-gauge
syringe needle. The pellets were carefully inserted to prevent distortion
or wrinkling inside the cartridge. Then the prepared tip was washed
with methanol (200 μL × 5) and water (200 μL ×
1) to remove the pore templates and homogenize the packing state.
Morphology observation of SPM-tip and ChocoTip was carried out using
a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM; JSM6700-M, JEOL,
Tokyo, Japan).
Figure 1
Preparation process and desalting performance of SPM-tip.
(a) Preparation
process of SPM-tip. (b) Comparison of the sum of peptide intensities
binned by retention time between SPM-tip and SDB-XC-tip. 500 ng of
tryptic peptides from HeLa cell lysates were loaded onto each StageTip,
and a sample equivalent to 250 ng of peptides was injected into the
LC–MS/MS system. The error bars indicate the SDs of triplicate
analyses with three StageTips.
Cell Culture
HeLa S3 cells obtained from the JCRB Cell
Bank (Osaka, Japan) were cultured to 80% confluency in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum in
10 cm diameter dishes. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS,
collected using a cell scraper, and pelleted by centrifugation.
Protein Extraction
HeLa cell lysates were digested
using phase-transfer surfactant–aided trypsin digestion as
described previously.
43
,
44
Briefly, the cell pellets were
suspended in 1 mL of buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium
lauroyl sarcosinate in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.0) containing protease
inhibitors. The cells were incubated on a heating block at 95 °C
for 5 min and then sonicated for 20 min. The extracted proteins were
quantified with a BCA protein assay kit, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol
for 30 min, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the
dark. The samples were diluted 5-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate
and then digested with Lys-C for 3 h at room temperature and with
trypsin overnight at 37 °C. One mL of ethyl acetate was added
to 1 mL of the digested solution, and the mixture was acidified with
0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (final concentration). The samples
were vortexed for 2 min and centrifuged at 15,800g for 2 min to completely
separate the aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase was collected,
dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA/5% acetonitrile (ACN) solution, and
desalted as follows.
Desalting by StageTip
SPM-tip and ChocoTip were prepared
as described above. For comparison, SDB-XC-tips were manufactured
by stamping out three pieces or a single piece of Empore SDB-XC disk
with a 16-gauge syringe needle and packing into 200 μL pipet
tips. Desalting procedures are summarized in
Table
1
, and were in line with those in the previous
study.
39
After desalting, peptides were
dried in a vacuum centrifuge and the residue was dissolved in 4% ACN
with 0.5% TFA. Throughout this study, the sample loading amount into
StageTip was referenced to the protein amount before the digestion
process, as determined by BCA assay.
Table 1
Summary of Solvents Used for Peptide
Desalting
Step number
Content
Solution
Centrifugation
conditions
1
Washing
80% ACN and 0.1% TFA
1000
g
× 2 min
2
Equilibration
4% ACN and
0.1% TFA
1000
g
× 2 min
3
Sample
loading
4% ACN and 0.1% TFA
800 g × 3 min
4
Washing
4% ACN and 0.1% TFA
1000
g
× 2 min
5
Elution
80% ACN and 0.1% TFA
800
g
× 3 min
LC–MS/MS Analysis
Orbitrap System
Unless otherwise described, LC–MS/MS
analysis was carried out in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode
with a FAIMS Pro Duo interface connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
Tribrid MS. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.4 kV in the positive
mode. The FAIMS mode was set to standard resolution, and the total
carrier gas flow was 4.6 L/min. The compensation voltage (CV) was
set to −40, −60, and −80, and the cycle time
of each CV experiment was set to 1 s. The mass range of the survey
scan was from 300 to 1,500
m
/
z
with
a resolution of 120,000, standard automatic gain control (AGC), and
a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS scan was performed using
an ion trap with a rapid ion trap scan rate, standard AGC, a maximum
injection time of 35 ms, and an isolation window of 1.6
m
/
z
. The precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy
collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30%.
The exclusion duration was set to 20 s. LC was performed on an Ultimate
3000 pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC
Analytics) using self-pulled needle columns (150 mm length, 100 μm
ID, 6 μm needle opening) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ
1.9 μm reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).
45
The injection volume was 5 μL, and the
flow rate was 500 nL/min. Separation was achieved by applying a three-step
linear gradient of 4–8% ACN in 5 min, 8–32% ACN in 60
min, 32–80% ACN in 5 min, and 80% ACN for 10 min in 0.5% acetic
acid.
Q-TOF System
For comparison, we analyzed the same samples
by LC–TIMS/Q/TOF using a timsTOF Pro 2 (Bruker, Bremen, Germany).
The TIMS section was operated with a 100 ms ramp time and a scan range
of 0.6–1.5 V s cm
–2
. One cycle was composed
of 1 MS scan followed by 10 parallel accumulation serial fragmentation
MS/MS scans. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded from
m
/
z
100 to 1,700. A polygon filter was applied to
avoid selecting singly charged ions. The quadrupole isolation width
was set to
m
/
z
2 or 3. The collision
energy was ramped stepwise as a function of increasing ion mobility:
42 eV for 0–6% of the ramp time; 32 eV from 6 to 22%; 37 eV
from 22 to 44%; 42 eV from 44 to 67%; 47 eV from 67 to 89%; and 51
eV for the remainder. The timsTOF Pro 2 was connected to the same
LC system and autosampler as the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS
using self-pulled needle columns (250 mm length, 100 μm ID)
packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm reversed-phase material
(Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The injection volume was 5 μL,
and the flow rate was 500 nL/min. Separation was achieved by applying
a three-step linear gradient of 4–8% ACN in 5 min, 8–32%
ACN in 60 min, 32–80% ACN in 5 min and 80% ACN for 10 min in
0.1% formic acid.
Database Searching and Data Processing
The raw MS data
was analyzed by MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.6.17.0.
46
Peptides and proteins were identified by an automated database
search using Andromeda against the human SwissProt Database (version
2022–10, 20,401 protein entries). The data files collected
from FAIMS experiments were split into a set of MaxQuant-compliant
MzXML files using FAIMS MzXML Generator (
https://github.com/coongroup/FAIMS-MzXML-Generator
). For data files of the Orbitrap system, the precursor mass tolerance
of 20 ppm for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the main search, and the
fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were set. For the Q-TOF system,
the precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search, 10 ppm
for the main search, and the fragment ion mass tolerance of 40 ppm
were set. The enzyme was set as Trypsin/P with two missed cleavages.
“Cysteine carbamidomethylation” was set as a fixed modification
and “methionine oxidation” and “acetylation on
the protein N-terminus” were set as variable modifications.
The search results were filtered with FDR < 1% at the peptide spectrum
match (PSM) and protein levels. The match-between-runs algorithm (MBR)
was utilized through the “Identification” subtab in
the “Global Parameters” tab of MaxQuant to mitigate
the missing value problem. The default settings for MBR were used
(0.7 min match window and 20 min alignment time). Proteins that have
“Only identified by site”, “potential contaminants”
and “reverse sequences” were removed for data analysis.
Results and Discussion
We first compared SPM-tip with
SDB-XC-tip for desalting 500 ng
of tryptic peptides from HeLa cell lysates. The preparation of SPM-tip
is illustrated in
Figure
1
a. In brief, a string-shaped SPM with a diameter of 1.5 mm
was cut into pellets of 2.0 mm in length using a scalpel or scissors.
The pellets were inserted straight into a 200 μL pipet tip and
gently pressed with a 17-gauge stainless steel needle (1.4 mm o.d.)
until the needle became caught on the inner wall, preventing further
insertion. The sponge-like flexibility allowed the SPM to fit snugly
into the pipet tip. On the other hand, SDB-XC-tips were prepared by
stamping Empore SDB-XC disks with a 16-gauge needle (1.6 mm inner
diameter) according to the original method for preparing StageTips
using Empore disks.
15
Three Empore disks
were stacked in order to keep the volume of the stationary phase roughly
the same as that of the SPM-tip, according to the previous report.
39
A SEM image of a cross-section of SPM-tip
is shown in
Figure S1
. Desalting steps
were rapidly completed
with simple centrifugation due to the high permeability of the SPM-tip.
After desalting, a sample equivalent to 250 ng of peptides was injected
onto the LC–MS/MS.
Figure
1
b shows the sum of peptide intensities based on the
peptide–ion intensity of MQ label-free quantification binned
by retention time in LC–MS/MS, with each retention time window
partitioned by 5 min for both SPM- and SDB-XC-tip. The sum of peptide
intensities was higher for SDB-XC-tip, and SPM-tip exhibited a limited
ability to cature hydrophilic peptides with short retention times
(
Figure
1
b, gray region).
The weak retention of peptides on SPM-tip could be attributed to the
less hydrophobic structure compared to St-DVB particles in the Empore
SDB-XC disk. Interestingly, the sum of intensities of peptides with
long retention times was similar or slightly higher in the case of
SPM-tip (
Figure
1
b,
red region). This result strongly suggested that St-DVB particles
and SPM are suitable for the retention of peptides of different hydrophobicity
and that hybridization of these materials may allow comprehensive
recovery of peptides.
Then, we prepared ChocoTip to compare
the desalting performance
with that of SDB-XC-tip. The packing process for ChocoTip employed
the same procedure used for SPM-tip.
Figure
2
a shows the sum of peptide intensities for
ChocoTip and SDB-XC-tip. As expected, both the sum of peptide intensities
and the number of identified peptides were higher for ChocoTip compared
to SDB-XC-tip, especially in the long retention time region (
Figure
2
a,
Figure S2a
). Notably, the excellent recovery efficiency of
ChocoTip was highlighted with a smaller sample amount. After desalting
20 ng tryptic peptides from HeLa cell lysates using each StageTip,
a sample equivalent to 10 ng of peptides was injected onto the LC–MS/MS
system. In ChocoTip, the sum of peptide intensities and the number
of identified peptides were significantly higher than in the case
of SDB-XC-tip over the entire retention time range (
Figure
2
b,
Figure S2b
). Specifically, while 1158 unique peptides were identified
using SDB-XC-tip and 4062 peptides were commonly identified, 6835
unique peptides were identified using ChocoTip (
Figure
2
c,
Figure S2
).
The unique peptides identified in ChocoTip tended to be longer than
the commonly identified peptides and unique peptides in SDB-XC-tip
(
Figure S3
), suggesting that ChocoTip might
be useful for bottom-up proteomics using long peptides, such as in
post-translational modification analysis
47
and structural proteomics using limited proteolysis,
48
as well as middle-down proteomics.
49
Furthermore, the peptide intensity of each commonly
identified peptide was consistently higher for ChocoTip over the entire
retention time range (
Figure
2
d) and the trend toward greater intensity was more pronounced
at longer retention times.
Figure 2
Desalting performance of ChocoTip compared to
SDB-XC-tip. (a),
(b) Comparison of the sum of peptide intensities binned by retention
time between ChocoTip and SDB-XC-tip. StageTips were used for desalting
(a) 500 ng or (b) 20 ng of tryptic peptides from HeLa cell lysates.
A sample equivalent to (a) 250 ng or (b) 10 ng of peptides was injected
into the LC–MS/MS system. The error bars indicate the SDs of
triplicate analyses with three StageTips. (c) Overlap of identified
peptides between ChocoTip and SDB-XC-tip. Only peptides identified
in all triplicate analyses were used for the evaluation. (d) Scatter
plot of the commonly identified peptide intensity ratio with ChocoTip
and SDB-XC-tip versus the retention time. The green line is the linear
regression line obtained by the least-squares method. Panls c and
d were analyzed using the same LC–MS/MS data sets as panel
b.
In addition to the hydrophobic peptides, we also
examined hydrophilic
peptides that eluted before 25 min. When 20 ng of HeLa peptides were
analyzed using ChocoTip, 626 peptides were identified, whereas only
499 peptides were identified using SDB-XC-tip. For the 360 peptides
that were identified in common, the peak intensity ratios were examined.
As shown in
Figure
2
D, the earlier the elution, the higher the intensity ratio, and on
average the peak intensity was 1.7 times higher with ChocoTip than
with SDB-XC-tip.
Regarding the reproducibility in triplicate
analyses of the 20
ng HeLa peptides, the median RSD value using ChocoTip was 16.2%, while
18.1% was obtained using SDB-XC-tip for 4062 commonly identified peptides,
confirming equivalent reproducibility for both approaches. LC–TIMS/Q/TOF
analysis was also carried out for peptides desalted with ChocoTip
and SDB-XC-tip, and the results suggest the advantage could be independent
of the downstream LC–MS/MS system (
Figure S4
). In our previous report,
39
we
compared the standard SDB-XC-tip with SDB-particle (InertSep PLS-2)
packed tip, more hydrophobic C18-modified SDB-particle (InertSep RP-C18)
packed tip, and PGC-tip, but we did not observe any significant improvement
in peptide recovery at room temperature, as achieved with ChocoTip,
supporting the validity to use SDB-XC-tip as representative of the
conventional SPE tips. Notably, since the introduction of StageTip
in 2003,
14
we have not observed such a
remarkable difference in performance.
5
,
15
,
33
,
39
We also determined
the percent recovery before and after ChocoTip
desalting processes using purified peptides. First, 500 ng of HeLa
peptides were desalted using ChocoTip. Then, the purified peptides
equivalent to 20 ng were subjected to a second desalting using either
ChocoTip or SDB-XC-tip. Samples equivalent to 10 ng of peptides before
and after the second desalting were injected onto the LC–TIMS/Q/TOF
system, and the total peptide intensity as well as the intensity of
each identified peptide were quantified. As shown in
Figure S5
, over the entire retention time range, ChocoTip
consistently demonstrated significantly higher peptide recovery compared
to SDB-XC-tip, highlighting the superior performance. Regarding the
percent recovery for each peptide, ChocoTip achieved a median recovery
of 94.9% for 3230 peptides, whereas SDB-XC-tip achieved a median recovery
of only 52.2% for 1273 peptides. In brief, the ChocoTip method was
demonstrated to be a suitable sample treatment for ultrasensitive
proteomics, giving superior results to the standard StageTip.
To investigate the factors contributing to the highly efficient
recovery of peptides with ChocoTip, we observed the surface morphology
of ChocoTip with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (
Figure
3
a). In ChocoTip, the surface
of the St-DVB particles was partially enveloped by the fibrous structure
of the monolithic carrier, and the particles were arranged on the
surface of the μm-sized through-pores. This result suggested
that the enhanced hydrophobicity of the surface of ChocoTip with St-DVB
particles is the reason for the comprehensive retention of peptides.
In addition, mercury intrusion porosimetry analysis was carried out
to characterize the pore size distribution of the SDB-XC-tip, SPM-tip,
and ChocoTip (
Figure
3
b). In each material, μm-sized through-pores were observed.
Interestingly, while nm-sized mesopores of St-DVB particles were observed
in the SDB-XC-tip, they were not observed in ChocoTip, even though
it contains St-DVB particles. This could be attributed to thermally
melted EVA filling the mesopores of St-DVB particles during the mixing
process. The mesopores of RP hydrophobic materials often irreversible
adsorb peptides, decreasing the recovery efficiency in the purification
process.
50
Thus, the high recovery in the
case of ChocoTip could be a consequence of the enhanced hydrophobicity
of the through-pore surface of SPM with embedded St-DVB particles,
as well as the suppression of irreversible peptide adsorption at the
mesopores of St-DVB particles.
Figure 3
Morphological characterization of ChocoTip.
(a) SEM image of the
surface of ChocoTip. The surface of the St-DVB particle is partially
enveloped by the fibrous structure of SPM. (b) Pore characterization
of SDB-XC-tip, SPM-tip, and ChocoTip by mercury porosimetry.
To test this hypothesis, we reduced the number
of pieces of Empore
SDB-XC disk in the SDB-XC-tip from three to one, anticipating a decrease
in irreversible peptide adsorption into the mesopores of St-DVB particles.
As expected, the peptide recovery efficiency at shorter retention
times was higher with one piece of Empore SDB-XC disk compared to
three pieces, suggesting that the lower peptide recovery efficiency
in SDB-XC-tip was likely due to irreversible adsorption in the mesopores
(
Figure S6
). However, even with this reduction
in the number of pieces of Empore SDB-XC disk, the recovery efficiency
of peptides with longer retention times remained higher with ChocoTip.
Furthermore, the irreversibly adsorbed peptides in SDB-XC-tip could
not be eluted even with strong elution buffers containing higher concentrations
of ACN (
Figure S7
). In another experiment,
we prepared a Stacking-SPM-tip by wet-packing 1.0 mg of St-DVB particles
into the SPM-tip (
Figure S8a
). Then, we
utilized Stacking-SPM-tip for desalting 20 ng of tryptic peptides
to compare the recovery efficiency with that of ChocoTip (
Figure S8b
). The sum of peptide intensities was
much higher in the case of ChocoTip than Stacking-SPM-tip, indicating
superior recovery efficiency with ChocoTip. These results strongly
support our hypothesis and indicate that the unique morphology of
ChocoTip formed in the thermal mixing process is the reason for the
significantly reduced sample loss and high recovery in the desalting
step using the StageTip method.
Conclusions
In this study, we developed ChocoTip as
a novel peptide purification
technique for MS-based proteomics. The stationary phase of ChocoTip
was synthesized by thermally mixing two types of hydrophobic polymers,
thermoplastic EVA resin and St-DVB particles. The sponge-like flexibility,
derived from the monolithic EVA carrier, simplified the column packing
process, offering both ease and reproducibility. Peptide samples were
comprehensively retained on the hydrophobic surface of ChocoTip, composed
of embedded St-DVB particles and the monolithic carrier, while thermally
melted EVA resin effectively prevented irreversible adsorption onto
the mesopores of St-DVB particles by filling up these pores. ChocoTip
outperformed standard SDB-XC-tip in peptide recovery efficiency, enabling
the identification of more than double the number of peptides from
20 ng of tryptic peptides of Hela cell lysates. In addition, the intensities
of commonly identified peptides were higher with ChocoTip than with
SDB-XC-tip over the entire retention time range, further underscoring
the high recovery obtained with ChocoTip. This advantage is particularly
pronounced for hydrophobic and longer peptides. Thus, ChocoTip is
a promising platform for peptide purification in ultrasensitive proteomics,
paving the way for improved analytical capabilities in a variety of
proteomics applications.