1
Introduction
Polymersomes are vesicular
macromolecular assemblies whose bilayer
membrane is composed of amphiphilic block copolymers.
1
,
2
They were first described by van Hest et al.
3
, and Zhang and Eisenberg
4
in two seminal
studies in
Science
in 1995, and they have been investigated
as drug carriers for a variety of conditions including cancer, inflammation,
and metabolic diseases.
5
The chemical composition
and length of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic blocks determine key
polymersome properties such as membrane toughness, permeability, stability,
and stimuli responsiveness.
1
,
2
,
6
,
7
Polymersomes exhibit high
chemical versatility, a high degree of
surface PEGylation, and–in certain cases–high membrane
stability.
8
The broad chemical space of
polymers has been leveraged to modulate membrane permeability for
controlled release and analyte sensing, and stimuli responsiveness.
9
−
12
A seminal study in 1999 found a higher membrane stability of polymersomes
than low phase-transition temperature liposomes.
13
This study raised hopes that polymersomes exhibit less
drug leakage and prolonged release kinetics than liposomes. Furthermore,
the higher degree of surface PEGylation (100% for PEG polymersomes
vs generally 1–5% for liposomes
10
,
14
) raised hopes
that polymersomes exhibit less uptake by the mononuclear phagocyte
system and thus longer blood circulation time. However, these hypotheses
have not yet been convincingly proven as discussed in detail in reference.
10
The polymersome field was in exponential
growth phase for several
years and reached the maturity phase in the late 2010s (
Figure
1
). Despite many studies with
promising results
in vitro
and
in vivo
, polymersomes have not reached clinical trials yet.
15
,
16
As the polymersome field is maturing, renewed efforts are warranted
to accelerate clinical translation in order to evaluate the true clinical
potential of polymersomes. The clinical translation of polymersomes
has been hampered by several factors. The main obstacle is that a
competitive vesicular formulation–liposomes–have been
in clinical use for 30 years and thus exhibits an established clinical
safety profile.
14
In contrast, obtaining
approval from regulatory authorities for the use of polymersomes as
novel drug delivery system is time-consuming and costly, especially
because the approval includes the characterization of the polymersome-forming
block copolymers as excipients and the supramolecular assembly.
17
A clinical translation of polymersomes is only
worthwhile if they offer clear advantages over conventional nanoformulations,
namely liposomes, that justify the costly regulatory approval process.
Figure 1
Scientific
publications and major trends in the polymersome field
over the last 30 years. Number of published articles on polymersomes
since 1995 according to Pubmed (search terms: polymersome, polymersomes,
polymeric vesicle, polymeric vesicles in Title/Abstract).
For complex systems such as polymersomes, a key
to successful translation
is high reproducibility. In this regard, polymersomes face higher
challenges than liposomes: there is higher variability of the vesicle-forming
amphiphile (polymers are a mixture of different chain lengths compared
to phospholipids that have one chemical structure), less consensus
on standardized preparation methods (efficient methods with high yields
for liposomes including film rehydration, ethanol injection, reverse
phase evaporation followed by extrusion;
18
these methods can be challenging for polymersomes due to their higher
hydrophobicity and thus risk of aggregation), and the higher chemical
versatility of polymersomes (e.g., biodegradable polymers with tunable
degradation kinetics).
Pharmaceutical analysis is a key tool
in characterizing active
components and excipients of pharmaceutical formulations and to ensure
high reproducibility. Vesicular formulations are defined by a number
of key parameters that the refer to the morphology, charge, drug content
and release, and pharmacokinetics of the formulation. Reporting these
properties in scientific publications is crucial and will allow for
higher reproducibility and accelerate the translation of polymersome
formulations. In this perspective article, I am describing key polymersome
parameters and discuss how they can be measured and how they impact
the interactions of polymersomes with biological systems. The ultimate
goal of this perspective is to define hallmarks of polymersome characterization
to facilitate reproducibility of polymersome systems and thus to jumpstart
polymersome translation to the clinics.
2
Lessons from Bio- and Nanosimilars
Clinically used complex formulations such as bio- and nanotherapeutics
hold important lessons for the characterization of polymersomes. Regulatory
guidelines on bio- and nanosimilars highlight the key role of pharmaceutical
analysis in the development of robust formulations.
Biosimilars
are generic versions of therapeutic proteins. In contrast
to generics of small molecules, which require an in-depth characterization
of the active pharmaceutical ingredient and a clinical bioequivalence
study with a limited set of pharmacokinetic parameters,
19
much more analysis is needed for biosimilars.
According to current Food and Drug Administration guidelines, characterization
of biosimilars includes a physicochemical characterization of the
protein such as primary and higher order structure, charge, glycosylation,
and size distribution.
20
They also include
a functional characterization in terms of target and receptor binding,
and bioactivity in cell assays.
20
Most relevant to polymersomes are guidelines for liposome nanosimilars.
The guidance document of the European Medicine Agency (
Table
1
) refers to a thorough description
and characterization of the liposomal components and the liposomes.
The liposomal components include membrane components (lipids, cholesterol),
the active substance, and excipients of the formulation, as well as
intermediates during the manufacturing process. The guidelines put
an emphasis on the quality of the lipid starting materials, highlighting
that
“The quality and purity of the lipid starting
materials is essential for the later quality of the drug product,
therefore the appropriate characterization and specification of the
lipid starting material is considered as vital”
. Lipid
starting materials should be thoroughly described and characterized,
intermediates during the manufacturing process identified and controlled,
and the stability should be determined in the finished product. Liposome
characterization includes morphology and size, the amount of encapsulated
active substance and its release rate, storage and in-use stability,
and the robustness of the reconstitution procedure if needed. Depending
on the specific function of the liposomal formulation, additional
parameters should be reported such as the localization and physical
state of the encapsulated drug, or liposomal stability in plasma.
PEG properties, linker chemistry, and linker stability should be reported
for PEGylated liposomes.
Table 1
Key Information and Characterization
of Liposome Nanosimilars as Defined by the EMA (Reflection Paper on
the Data Requirements for Intravenous Liposomal Products Developed
with Reference to an Innovator Liposomal Product, EMA/CHMP/806058/2009/Rev.
02, 21 February 2013)
Physicochemical
properties
Liposomal components
Lipid
starting materials
• Description, source, and
characterization
• Impurity profile,
isomers, and stability characteristics
Critical excipients
• Quality, purity, and stability
Manufacturing
process
• Identification and control of key intermediates
• Active substance/lipidic moiety ratio at
relevant
manufacturing steps to be within acceptable range
Stability
• Active substance
•
Lipids and functional excipients in the finished product,
including critical degradation products
Liposomes
Vesicle
• Morphology
• Mean
size and size distribution
• Aggregates
Active
substance
• Fraction of encapsulated active substance
(amount
of free/entrapped)
Stability
•
Monitoring during storage with focus on batch-to-batch
consistency
• Under proposed in-use
conditions
Release rate
•
In vitro
drug substance release rate
from the liposome in physiologically/clinically relevant media
Reconstitution
and/or
pharmacy preparation
• Robustness
Additional parameters
depending
on the specific function of the liposomal formulation
Vesicle
• Surface charge
• pH of internal compartment for pH-gradient loaded
liposomes
• Characterization of lipid
bilayer phase transition
behavior
Active
substance
• Distribution within liposome (e.g.,
surface, bilayer,
interior, etc.)
• Characterization
of physical state of the active substance
inside the liposome (e.g., precipitation in the case of doxorubicin)
Stability
• Maintenance of liposomal formulation integrity in
plasma
Conjugated
(e.g., pegylated) liposomes
• Quality and purity
of the PEG starting material
• Molecular
weight of conjugated lipid and size distribution
• Details of linkage chemistry (such as PEG-lipid or
similar constructs with or without PEG)
•
Disposition of PEG at surface
• Stability
of conjugation
For the development of high-quality and highly reproducible
polymersome
formulations, these guidelines teach us the importance of describing
and characterizing the properties of the vesicular components and
vesicles.
3
Hallmarks of Polymersome Characterization
Informed by regulatory guidelines on the characterization of nanosimilars,
I am proposing a set of key polymersome properties to characterize
and report in each polymersome study (
Figure
2
). They include the characterization of polymersome
components and of the macromolecular assembly. This section highlights
how these properties are related to polymersome function and interactions
with biologic systems, and how they can be measured.
Figure 2
Hallmarks of polymersome
characterization. The nine hallmarks include
the block copolymer composition (structure, molecular weight, polydispersity
index), impurities, polymersome morphology, surface charge, surface
functionalization, drug loading and release kinetics, stimuli responsiveness,
stability, and pharmacokinetics and biodistribution.
3.1
Polymersome Components
Block Copolymer Composition
The block copolymer composition
plays a central role in polymersome formation and stability, membrane
permeability, and stimuli responsiveness.
21
For instance, the molecular weight ratio of the hydrophilic to the
hydrophobic block defines if the copolymers form vesicles or micelles.
1
For biodegradable polymers, differences in molecular
weight impact the degradation kinetics. The main properties of the
polymer are chemical composition, molecular weight and its distribution,
the glass transition temperature, and the linker chemistry. The chemical
composition of the polymer is characterized by spectroscopic methods
(nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy, absorbance and/or fluorescence spectroscopy).
22
To determine the molecular weight and its distribution
(polydispersity index) of the block copolymer, gel permeation chromatography
(size exclusion chromatography) is commonly used.
23
Particular attention should be paid to the molecular weight
standards to ensure that they have the same or very similar physicochemical
different as the measured polymer. Mass spectrometry (e.g., MALDI
TOF) can also be used to determine the molecular weight.
24
The glass transition temperature is an important
determinant of polymer rigidity, and is generally measured using differential
scanning calorimetry.
25
The linker chemistry
of the block copolymers should also be reported as ester- or amide-based
linkers may have limited stability in biological fluids.
Impurities
Impurities can stem from the polymerization
procedure (monomers, initiator, catalysts, etc.), or the polymersome
preparation process (e.g., microfluidics, nanoprecipitation, emulsification,
film rehydration) where organic solvents are often utilized.
26
These low molecular weight impurities can partition
into the membrane and act as a plasticizer which may affect membrane
rigidity, polymersome stability, and drug release.
27
Furthermore, these potentially toxic solvents could be
released once the polymersome is in the body. Therefore, it may be
beneficial to quantify the content of organic solvent in the polymersome
formulation. Quantification methods include gas chromatography coupled
to flame ionization detector and high-performance liquid chromatography
coupled to mass spectrometry.
3.2
Polymersomes
Size, Morphology, and Membrane Rigidity
The vesicle
size and morphology affect many aspects of polymersome interactions
with biological systems including uptake by the mononuclear phagocytic
system, extravasation, and organ distribution.
28
,
29
For orally applied polymersomes, size determines interactions with
the epithelium and bioavailability due to size-dependent differences
in diffusion across the mucin layer and M-cell uptake in Peyer’s
patches.
30
The preparation method and postpreparation
processes such as extrusion and sonication determine polymersome size.
31
For nanosized polymersomes, dynamic light scattering
is the method of choice; laser diffraction is used for vesicles in
the high submicron and micron range.
32
Light
and fluorescence microscopy allow for the visualization of the polymersome
size, size distribution, and morphology.
23
Transmission (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) provide
information on particle size and morphology.
23
Freeze-fracture cryo-SEM is used to determine the lamellarity and
membrane thickness.
23
The membrane
rigidity influences the release kinetics of hydrophilic drugs,
33
the diffusion of vesicles across biological
barriers,
34
and macrophage uptake.
35
Liposomes composed of low phase transition phospholipids
have higher fluidity and release drugs faster, diffuse more easily
across biological barriers, and are more prone to phagocytosis.
33
−
35
The membrane rigidity of vesicles is commonly characterized by micropipet
aspiration experiments
36
or atomic force
microscopy.
37
Surface Charge
Surface charge affects interactions
with macrophages, cell membranes, and blood proteins.
38
For instance, as negatively charged phospholipids are located
in the inner cell layer in the physiological state and their translocation
to the outer layer signals apoptosis, negatively charged surface groups
generally promote phagocytosis.
35
Positively
charged phospholipids often exhibit toxicity because cationic charges
bind to the negatively charged cell membrane, which may lead to membrane
destabilization.
39
In blood, the binding
of cationic nanoparticles to the anionic membrane of erythrocytes
can lead to hemolysis.
40
Surface charge
also affects interactions with the immune system, including uptake
by immune cell type, cytokine release, complement adsorption and activation,
and hypersensitivity reactions as recently discussed.
41
−
44
Charge can also change in a stimuli-responsive manner, for instance
in systems where the hydrophobic block gets protonated in the acidic
endosome and leads to polymersome destabilization and cargo release.
Surface charge is a function of the chemical composition of the hydrophilic
block and, if the groups are weak acids or bases, the pH of the solution.
The surface charge is generally quantified by zeta potential measurements.
The zeta potential is the potential difference (i.e., charge) at the
characteristic slipping plane of electrophoretically mobile particles.
45
Surface Functionalization
The conjugation of hydrophilic
polymers such PEG to liposomes is common in many clinically used liposomal
formulations, and is performed by conjugation to a phospholipid.
14
,
46
,
47
In polymersomes, hydrophilic
polymers are an integral part of the block copolymer. However, other
molecules such as targeting ligands or reporter molecules (e.g., fluorophores)
can be linked to the polymersome surface.
48
These targeting ligands range from small molecules such as folic
acid to large molecules such as monoclonal antibodies.
49
,
50
The specificity of the targeting ligand alone and after conjugation
to the polymersomes should be determined in competition assays. The
details of the linkage chemistry should be reported, and the degree
of modification (i.e., amount of targeting ligand per polymersome)
should be determined.
51
The stability of
the conjugation should be investigated in biological fluids.
52
Drug Loading and Release
Polymersomes can be loaded
with hydrophilic and hydrophobic cargo. Hydrophilic drugs are encapsulated
in the aqueous core, and hydrophobic drugs partition into the membrane.
2
The amount of encapsulated drug and the release
kinetics are key attributes of polymersome drug delivery systems as
they determine the extent and kinetics of drug exposure of the body.
These properties are the basis of the dose calculation which aims
at reaching plasma drug levels within the therapeutic window.
The drug loading of the polymersome refers to the amount of encapsulated
drug per amount of polymer.
53
The amount
of loaded drug is determined by breaking the drug-loaded polymersomes
(e.g., using surfactants, organic solvents, ultrasound). The drug
is then quantified and normalized to the amount of polymer.
53
The drug loading efficiency or encapsulation
efficiency (usually expressed in %) refers to the ratio of the drug
loaded into the polymersomes in relation to the total amount of drug
used in the preparation procedure.
53
This
parameter is an indicator of the efficiency and robustness of the
drug loading process.
The drug release kinetics refers to the
amount of released drug
over time.
53
It is generally expressed
as the percentage of released drug in relation to the total amount
of loaded drug. The release kinetics are often analyzed in Franz cells.
54
In this setup, two compartments are separated
by a selectively permeable membrane that allows free diffusion of
the drug but is impermeable to the polymersomes. In the donor compartment,
drug-containing polymersomes are added. As the drug is released, it
diffuses across the membrane into the acceptor compartment where aliquots
are taken and the concentration of free drug is quantified. The release
kinetics is often determined in simple buffers at physiological pH
and under isotonic conditions. Adding biological fluids such as serum
can increase the physiological relevance.
55
Stimuli Responsiveness
Stimuli-responsive polymersomes
perform a desired action (e.g., drug release) when they encounter
a stimulus or when a trigger is applied. As various stimuli have been
reported (e.g., pH, ultrasound, light, temperature, reducing environment
56
), the experimental setup to validate stimuli
sensitivity needs to be tailored to the mechanism of stimuli responsiveness.
For instance, release experiments at acidic pH may be employed for
pH-responsive polymersomes whose release is triggered in the endosome.
For an ultrasound- or light-triggered release mechanism, it is important
to consider potential impacts of biological tissues such as ultrasound
and light attenuation.
Stability
Stability relates to the capacity of a chemical
entity or macromolecular assembly to remain physicochemically similar
or active in different media (often biological fluids) and after a
storage period. The stability of the block copolymer in terms of chemical
composition is determined by the methods described above. The stability
of polymersomes in biological fluids such as plasma or blood can provide
important insights into the performance
in vivo
.
57
,
58
The determination of polymersome stability under storage conditions
determines shelf life.
59
Polymersome stability
can be determined by physicochemical characterization or activity
measurements. Polymersome size is an important physicochemical property,
as an increase in size and the appearance of aggregates indicates
instability.
60
Size measurements in biological
fluids (plasma, serum, blood) may be difficult due to the presence
of particles (platelets, exosomes, erythrocytes, lipoprotein particles,
potentially protein aggregates) in these media.
61
−
64
The stability can also be determined
by various
in vitro
activity assays such as drug
release (see above), activity in terms of effects on cells or sensing
of an analyte, or binding to the target in case of targeted polymersomes.
Pharmacokinetics and Biodistribution
The circulation
time and organ distribution have a direct impact on the efficacy and
toxicity profile of polymersomes.
28
For
intravenously administered controlled release formulations, the circulation
time of polymersomes is important as this parameter influences how
long the drug is released into the bloodstream.
65
In case of polymersomes with active targeting ligands,
the extent and kinetics of the accumulation in the target tissue is
a key indicator of performance.
21
For controlled release formulations aiming at extended drug release,
the drug is generally quantified in the plasma and pharmacokinetic
parameters (half-life, maximum concentration, time of maximum concentration,
area under the curve,
AUC
) are determined. Generally,
blood samples are taken and the polymersomes are broken to determine
the total drug concentration in plasma.
66
As this concentration refers to free and polymersome-encapsulated
drug at the same time, there may be a need to determine the polymersome
kinetics separately. To determine the pharmacokinetics of the polymersome,
polymersomes can be labeled with a marker that is covalently linked
to the polymer, embedded in the membrane with a hydrophobic tail,
or encapsulated in the polymersome lumen.
The biodistribution
refers to the accumulation of polymersomes
in different organs. Various organs of interest are harvested at different
time points and the drug or polymersome concentration is quantified
by fluorescence or radioactivity.
67
Using
imaging methods such as SPECT, polymersome distribution can also be
quantified in real time
in vivo
.
29
For nonintravenously applied polymersome formulations (e.g.,
oral or subcutaneous route), the bioavailability of the polymers and
the drug can be determined. The bioavailability is the amount of drug
or polymersomes that reaches the systemic compartment. It is determined
by comparing the AUC of a nonintravenous administration to the intravenous
administration.
4
Conclusions and Outlook
Polymersomes
have the potential to become the next generation of
vesicular drug delivery systems due to their high chemical versatility
and in certain cases higher membrane stability than liposomes. However,
despite the initial high hopes for the potential of polymersomes,
the clinical translation has been slow. As the field is maturing,
the importance of meticulous characterization and reporting of key
parameters of polymersome formulations has become evident.
Inspired
by guidance from regulatory authorities on critical properties
of liposomal nanosimilars, hallmarks of polymersome characterization
were defined. Reporting hallmarks of polymersome properties in a publication
will improve quality, enhance reproducibility, and facilitate artificial
intelligence (AI)-based formulation strategies with the ultimate goal
of accelerating clinical translation of polymersomes. Similarly, in
related fields such extracellular vesicles, there has been a push
to improve characterization and reporting in order to increase reproducibility.
68
When polymersomes enter clinical trials, regulatory
authorities may eventually publish dedicated guidelines for polymersomes.
As our understanding of blood-material and immune system-material
interactions is growing in the polymersome context, new tools will
emerge for the characterization of polymersomes. For instance, as
our understanding of the impact of the protein corona on pharmacokinetic
parameters is deepening, there have been growing interest in using
proteomics to quantify protein adsorption on nanoparticles.
69
,
70
Furthermore, we are starting to understand the complex interactions
of polymersomes with different immune cell types, and how these interactions
can be leveraged to modulate the therapeutic properties of polymersome-based
therapeutics.
71
,
72
As the interactions of polymersomes
with biological components are determinants of their pharmacokinetics
or in some cases pharmacodynamics, there will a growing need to characterize
and report these interactions in a standardized manner.
AI is
emerging as a key tool in the development of novel drug delivery
systems.
73
The use large data sets to train
machine learning algorithms holds high promise to identify new compositions
without cumbersome wet-lab experiments.
74
A recent article pointed to the many potential uses of AI in polymersome
development.
75
Rigorous and extensive reporting
of polymersome properties is the basis for the establishment of large
high-quality data sets. Indeed, missing data is a key problem hindering
AI-based research in drug delivery science.
76
In order to leverage the potential of AI, the polymersome community
needs to find standardized ways to report critical quality parameters
in a form that can easily be extracted for use as training data sets.