1
Introduction
The World Allergy Organization
White Paper reported that allergies
affect 10–40% of the global population, making it the sixth
most prevalent disease worldwide.
1
A
Lancet
study noted that approximately 262 million people
were affected by asthma, resulting in 455,000 deaths globally in 2019.
2
Allergic diseases are abnormal immune responses
triggered by exposure to allergens.
3
Activation
of allergens can initiate a cascade of chemical and biological reactions
within the immune system, leading to the development of allergy.
4
,
5
Allergens primarily consist of proteins derived from allergenic
species classified as plants, animals, and microorganisms.
4
These proteins have been widely detected in various
environmental matrices. For example, cockroach Bla g 1, mite Der f
1 and Der p 1, cat Fel d 1, and dog Can f 1 spread in indoor environment,
6
−
8
where allergic reactions mainly occur, as most people in modern
society spend approximately 90% of their time indoor.
9
The release, persistence, and interactive interface of
environmental allergens with the human body are still largely unclear,
hampering the mechanistic insights into the prevention and even therapy.
10
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are phospholipid
bilayer nanoparticles
encapsulating nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids.
11
,
12
As effective transporters of functional molecules, EVs were found
to play fundamental roles in mediating the immunological response.
13
EVs released by Gram-negative bacteria contain
lipopolysaccharide and can elicit a T helper type 2 (Th2) cell response,
triggering the release of inflammatory factors.
14
Indoor dust and its pathogenic bacteria-derived EVs also
induce inflammatory responses.
15
,
16
Plasma-derived EVs
from patients with allergic rhinitis carry Der p 1, a house dust mite
allergen.
17
Laboratory studies have shown
that both
Dermatophagoides farinae
and
germinated olive pollen-borne EVs contain their respective major allergens,
Der f 1, Ole e 1, Ole e 11, and Ole e 12.
18
,
19
We have identified these small vesicles in various environmental
matrices.
20
,
21
However, the prevalence and allergenicity
of EVs carrying environmental allergens remain to be validated.
In this study, we posited that allergenic species release EVs that
act as environmental carriers of allergens and trigger allergic responses.
We used household dust samples, three typical allergenic species (
Staphylococcus aureus
,
D. farinae
, and
Artemisia annua
), as well as
published data to investigate the prevalence of EV-associated allergens.
The allergenicity of allergen-harboring EVs was then studied by integrating
the in vitro and in vivo models.
2
Materials
and Methods
2.1
Household Dust Collection and Processing
We conducted a nation-level household dust sampling project across
China from July to October 2022. In this study, we used dust samples
distributed in five provinces consisting of 37 from rural areas and
38 from urban areas. Urban and rural areas are defined according to
the local administrative management system, whereas urban areas have
a population and traffic density much higher than those of rural areas.
No mold or water flooding issues were reported during the sampling
period. A long-term composite sample of accumulated particulate matter
was collected from floors, shelves, table surfaces, and air conditioning
filters. Upon receipt, the dust samples were immediately filtered
through a 40-mesh screen with 425 μm pore-size grating to remove
coarse particles, then homogenized, aliquoted, and stored at −20
°C until further use. Geographical coordinates were generated
from house addresses, and sampling information, including house parameters
and corresponding environmental factors, is detailed in
Table S1
. Environmental data were obtained from
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA,
https://www.noaa.gov/
) and the
National Center for Environmental Information (NCEI,
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/
) websites. Health status of the occupants was collected, and 176
occupants completed the self-administered questionnaire. The collection
was approved by the ethical committee of the Institute of Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2.2
Isolation and Purification
of EVs from Household
Dust
To ensure a sufficient yield of EVs, dust from multiple
households in each province was pooled, resulting in 10 samples used
for EV isolation and purification via ultracentrifugation as well
as density gradient ultracentrifugation. The EV isolation protocol
followed previous studies with modifications.
15
,
21
Briefly, no less than 40 g of dust was suspended with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) (pH = 7.4) at a 1:25 (weight/volume) ratio, stirred at
180 rpm/min at 4 °C. The solution was centrifuged at 8,000
g
for 20 min at 4 °C to roughly remove insoluble matter
and organisms. The supernatant was filtered through 0.22 μm
polyether sulfone membranes using a vacuum pump.
20
,
22
EVs ranging from tens to two hundred nanometers were used for further
analysis in this study. Then, EVs were pelleted using ultracentrifugation
at 100,000
g
for 2 h at 4 °C using SW 32 Ti rotor
(Beckman Coulter, CA, USA). After resuspension in PBS, The EVs were
filtered through a 100 kDa ultrafiltration membrane to remove free
allergens (<100 kDa).
23
,
24
For further purification,
EVs were subjected to an Optiprep (Iodixanol, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA) density gradient (45%, 40%, 35%, 30%, 25%, 20%, 15%, 10%
from bottom to top) and processed at 100,000
g
for
16 h at 4 °C using an SW 41 Ti rotor. EVs in each fraction were
recovered by diluting the sample at least 10-fold with PBS and pelleted
by ultracentrifugation (100,000
g
, 2 h, 4 °C,
SW 41 Ti rotor).
22
EVs were primarily distributed
in the 20–35% fractions and were collected and stored at −80
°C for subsequent experiments.
2.3
Characterization
and Stability of EVs
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM,
H-7650, Hitachi, Japan) was
employed to characterize the morphology of the dust EVs. Briefly,
5 μL of purified EVs were placed on a copper mesh for 3 min,
followed by a 50 s fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich,
pH = 7.4). Excess moisture was removed using filter paper, and the
air-dried copper mesh was imaged under the scope operating at 100
kV. Nanometer flow cytometry (NanoFCM, N30, Xiamen, China) was adapted
to measure the size distribution and particle concentration. A mixture
of silica nanospheres with four different diameters ranging from 68
to 155 nm was used as a reference. The EV particle levels were then
quantified and expressed as particles per gram of dust. The stability
of freshly extracted dust EVs was evaluated over a period of 50 days
at room temperature as well as by treatment with proteinase K (PK,
Solarbio, Beijing, China) and heating. A final concentration of 600
μg/mL of PK was applied to the PK group, which was then heated
at 55 °C for 30 min before inactivation at 95 °C for 10
min. The heated group underwent a heating process identical to that
used for the PK group.
2.4
DNA Extraction and Genomic
Sequencing
Total DNA was extracted from 0.5 g of dust using
a FastDNA SPIN kit
for soil (MP Biochemicals, Solon, OH, USA). The quantity and quality
of DNA were assessed by a Qubit 4.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham,
USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis, respectively. For the extraction
of dust EV-associated DNA, EVs were pretreated with 2U Turbo DNase
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 1 × DNase reaction buffer
at 37 °C for 30 min. Another round of DNase process was performed
to ensure complete elimination of DNA outside the EVs following previous
study.
20
−
22
The sample was heated to 75 °C for 15 min to
inactivate DNase, and then, the DNA was extracted. Metagenomic sequencing
was performed by the Illumina platform at Majorbio Co., Ltd. Absolute
quantification of 16S rRNA and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
was performed by Genesky Biotechnologies Inc. Paired-end Illumina
reads were trimmed of adaptors, and low-quality reads were removed
by fastp (version 0.20.0). Metagenomic data were assembled into contigs
(length ≥300 bp) using MEGAHIT. Open reading frames (ORFs)
from each contig were predicted using MetaGene, and the predicted
ORFs were retrieved and translated into amino acid sequences using
the NCBI translation table. A nonredundant gene catalog was constructed
using CD-HIT
25
with 90% sequence identity
and 90% coverage. Reads after quality control were mapped to the nonredundant
gene catalog with 95% identity using SOAPaligner (version 2.21), and
gene abundance in each sample was evaluated. The transcripts per million
method was used to normalize abundance values in the metagenomes.
Representative sequences of nonredundant gene catalog were aligned
to the NCBI NR database for taxonomic annotation. To identify the
dominant allergenic species, the virus and unclassified gene was excluded
based on taxonomic profiling data.
20
2.5
Metaproteomic Analysis
Total protein
content of EVs was lysed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, USA) and quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
specifications. Dust EV-associated proteins were subjected to label-free
metaproteomic sequencing at Majorbio (Shanghai, China). 100 μg
of dust EV-associated proteins were subjected to reductive alkylation,
followed by trypsin enzymolysis, and quantification of the enzymolysis
peptide using the Peptide Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, USA). Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed with peptide segments at a concentration
of 0.25 μg/μL with a mass spectrometry sample buffer (2%
acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) according to the quantitative results
of peptide segments. The highest score for a given peptide mass (best
match to that predicted in the database) was used to identify the
parent proteins. Trypsin was chosen as the digestion enzyme to allow
for two missed cleavages. Peptide spectral matches were validated
using q values with a false discovery rate of 0.01. To ensure better
coverage of the reference protein database, the constructed allergen
database and the nonredundant amino acid subset from the metagenomics
were included in the metaproteomic database and MS/MS spectra were
searched using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
The subcellular localization of the proteins was analyzed according
to the annotation information and the subcellular structure prediction
software was CELLO.
26
2.6
Compilation of Allergen Reference Data
Data from four
major allergen databases were compiled and served
as reference allergen databases for the identification of potential
allergens. These sources include the World Health Organization &
International Union of Immunological Societies (WHO/IUIS) Allergen
Nomenclature database, COMprehensive Protein Allergen REsource (COMPARE),
27
The Food Allergy Research and Resource Program
Allergen Protein database (AllergenOline),
28
as well as Allergome database
29
(
Table S2
). At the time of retrieval, these databases
contained a total of 10,638 allergen amino acid sequences. After removing
human protein allergens for autoimmune diseases and creating a nonredundant
subset using CD-HIT, 5,392 allergen amino acid sequences were compiled
to form the reference allergen database for this study.
2.7
Allergenic Species-Derived EV-Associated Proteins
Collection and Allergens Identification
Proteomic sequences
of allergenic species-derived EVs and EV protein markers were obtained
from the EVpedia database and additional literature source.
18
,
30
−
47
BLASTp and AllerCatPro 2.0 server
48
were
employed to align sequence of the potential EV-associated allergens
to the constructed database. The allergenic species in the constructed
allergen database were matched with those in the EVpedia database
to identify common species. EV-associated protein sequences from these
overlapping allergenic species were retrieved from Uniprot (
https://www.uniprot.org/
). Additionally,
the top 100 EV protein markers were also collected from the EVpedia
database. The BLASTp results were filtered for matched sequences with
an identity of 50% or more. Duplicates of allergen sequences that
aligned with an EV-associated protein were removed by recording the
top-matched allergen consensus sequence. Subject coverage (percentage
of the allergen sequence covered by the matching EV-associated proteins)
was calculated manually using the formula:
1
where
L
Sequence length
is the length of the matched consensus sequence and
L
Subject length
is the actual length of the allergen
sequence. The results were then subjected to a filtering process,
whereby only sequences with 90% or more subject coverage were retained.
All potential EV-associated allergens were further confirmed by the
AllerCatPro. The details of this workflow are presented in
Figure S5
. The decision workflow of AllerCatPro
can be described as follows: the query protein is subjected to analysis,
and the results are classified as strong, weak, or no evidence for
allergenic potential. The proteins with strong and weak evidence were
used for further analysis. The translated amino acid sequences associated
with dust EVs obtained from metagenomic sequencing, the proteins identified
in the dust EV metaproteome, and the collected data were then processed
through the identification workflow to align with the constructed
allergen database, thereby identifying EV-associated allergens.
2.8
Culture of Allergenic Species and EVs Extraction
S. aureus
RN4220 (ATCC 29213) was
cultured in Lysogeny Broth Medium (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co,
China) at 37 °C and 180 rpm/min to OD
600
= 1.3.
A. annua
pollen (purchased from Hangzhou Aileji Biotech
Ltd., Hangzhou, China) was hydrated in sterile rainwater filtered
through 0.22 μm membrane at a ratio of 1:100 (weight/volume)
and shaken at 25 °C and 150 rpm/min for 12 h. The total concentration
of nanoparticles in the rainwater was 3 orders of magnitude lower
than the pollen EVs. Purified
D. farinae
were obtained from Jiangsu Provincial Institute of Parasitic Disease
Control. They were cultured in a climatic incubator at 25 °C
with 70% relative humidity in a high-temperature baking sterilized
medium (containing yeast, starch, and rice flour).
D. farinae
was suspended in PBS at a ratio of 1:25
(weight/volume). The mixture was shaken at 4 °C and 180 rpm for
24 h. The cultured medium of
S. aureus
and the mixed suspension of pollen and
D. farinae
were all centrifuged at 4 °C under 8,000
g
for
20 min. After preprocess, the supernatants were filtered, concentrated,
and ultracentrifuged for the isolation of EVs using the same protocol
as for dust EVs.
2.9
Detection of Major Allergens
in EVs
ELISA kits (Mlbio, Shanghai, China) were used to estimate
the levels
of major allergens in both EVs and the supernatants. The allergenic
species suspension filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane was used
to extract all free allergens secreted by the allergenic species.
The supernatant after ultracentrifugation was defined as the supernatant
solution, and the precipitated EVs were resuspended in PBS. This allowed
for differentiation between EV-associated allergens and free allergens
in the supernatant (non-EVs). The proportion of major allergens in
EVs can be calculated as follows:
2
where
C
EVs
and
C
sup
are the concentrations of the
major allergen in EVs and supernatant, respectively, and
V
EVs
and
V
sup
are the corresponding
volume.
2.10
Cell Culture and Stimulation
Human
lung epithelial cell line (BEAS-2B) was purchased from the Cell Bank
of Type Culture Collection, Chinese Academy of Science. The cells
were propagated in DM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) in a 37 °C humidified
incubator with 5% CO
2
. 5 × 10
4
cells per
well were seeded in a 24-well plate and stimulated with recombinant
protein allergens, intact EVs, supernatant from ultracentrifugation,
and broken EVs by ultrasonic grinding with zirconium beads for 24
h at selected doses. Considering the amount of indoor dust inhaled
daily by humans and the level of indoor EVs.
9
,
16
The
amount of daily intake EVs was estimated to be 10
10
EVs/day
as calculated by 10
11
EVs/gram dust × 100 mg inhaled
dust/day. The total protein of each 4 × 10
10
EVs is
10 μg. Thus, we selected EVs concentrations of 1 and 10 μg
of protein as the exposure doses. To be noted that these acute experimental
doses mimic human exposure but do not represent the actual inhalation
volume for pulmonary epithelial cells. Cytokines in the supernatants
of cell culture media were measured by ELISA kits (Boster, Wuhan,
China).
2.11
EVs Labeling and Tracking
EVs were
resuspended in PBS and incubated with 10 μM DiO green fluorescent
dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for in vitro and DiR red fluorescent
dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for in vivo at room temperature
for 30 min. Then, PBS was added and EVs were collected by ultracentrifugation
as described above.
49
The 10
10
particles DiO-labeled EVs were added to the BEAS-2B cells and incubated
at 37 °C for 6 h. The cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
for 20 min at room temperature and washed three times in PBS. Cytoskeletal
and nuclear staining were performed using TRITC phalloidin (Yeasen,
Shanghai, China) and DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), respectively.
The images were then captured using a Leica TCS SP8 STED super-resolution
laser scanning confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).
The DiR-labeled EVs were administered intranasally to mice with 1
× 10
10
particles/g body weight. After 1 h, the tissue
distribution of DiR-EVs was tracked using the in vivo imaging system
(IVIS) spectrum (PerkinElmer). Mice were then sacrificed and the organs
were harvested for fluorescence measurements using the IVIS software
(Living Image Software for IVIS).
2.12
Animal
Experiments
4–6 week-old
female BALB/c mice were purchased from the Beijing Vital River Laboratory
Animal Technology Co., Ltd. The study was approved by the ethical
committee of the Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (LLSC202420). After acclimatization for 1 week, 15 mice were
treated intranasally with 100 μg of
A. annua
pollen extract (Beijing Macro-Union Pharmaceutical Limited Corporation)
on day 0. After 7 days, they were randomly divided into three groups
and respectively intranasally administered with equivalent protein
dose (1 μg) of pollen extract, pollen-derived EVs, and supernatant
once daily for 5 consecutive days. Mice treated with PBS served as
the controls. Mice behavior was recorded and scored within 10 min
after the final intranasal dose.
50
On day
14, serum and broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples and tissues
were collected for further analysis. Cytokine levels in BALF (Boster,
Wuhan, China) and antibodies in serum samples (Mlbio, Shanghai, China)
were measured using ELISA kits. HE staining was used for histopathological
analysis of the mice’s lungs and nasal mucosa.
2.13
Statistical Analysis
Statistical
analyses were performed using IBM SPSS 26.0 software (Chicago, IL,
USA), and all results were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation.
One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post hoc Tukey’s
test was used to assess differences in biochemical data between multiple
groups. Univariate statistical differences between each pair of groups
were assessed by the nonparametric factorial Kruskal–Wallis
sum-rank test, unless otherwise stated. Statistical significance was
considered at
P
< 0.05.
3
Results
3.1
Allergenic Species-Derived EVs Are Widespread
in Household Dust
Household dust samples from five provinces
possessing abundant dust from both rural and urban sources were selected
for EV analysis from a nationwide project (
Figure S1A, Table S1
). Questionnaires completed by 176 occupants indicated
a prevalence of doctor-diagnosed allergies of 19.9% (
Table S3
). Density gradient centrifugation showed that EVs
were primarily distributed in 20–35% fractions based on density
and TEM.
22
TEM analysis showed abundant
EVs with a typical teacup-shaped morphology
51
and bilayer membrane structure in all 10 samples (
Figure
1
A). Double-bilayer EVs were
also found, which were regarded as outer-inner membrane vesicles (OIMVs)
(
Figure
1
A). NanoFCM
reported the concentration of purified EVs ranged from 5.9 ×
10
7
to 3.8 × 10
9
particles/g dust, with
an average size of 69.4 ± 2.9 nm (
Figure
1
B,
Figure S1B
).
The abundance of EVs, indicated by protein concentrations and particle
numbers, showed a positive correlation with dust bacteria and fungi,
as indicated by the absolute copies of 16S rRNA and ITS, respectively
(
Figure
1
C). The particle
sizes and concentrations were similar between rural and urban areas
with no statistically significant differences (
Figure S1C,D
). Environmental factors were correlated with
the mean particle size and concentration of EVs (
Figure S1E
). PM
2.5
and PM
10
exerted
a significant negative influence on the concentration of the EV particles.
Conversely, the temperature and relative humidity exhibited a positive
correlation with the concentration of EV particles (
Figure S1E
). In a 50-day period of stability test, the classical
morphology of EVs remained observable at room temperature (
Figure S2A
). The concentration of EV particles
showed a gradual decrease and was maintained at 19.2–66.1%
(
Figure
1
D). After
50 days, EV-associated protein reduced by 33.3–48.3%, whereas
the non-EV supernatant protein content showed a more significant decrease
of 63.6–74.5% (
Figure
1
D). We then investigated their resilience to intense stress
conditions. After exposure to high temperatures or treatment with
PK, EVs retained a complete bilayer membrane morphology (
Figure S2B
), with 38.9–84.4 and 28.0–49.6%
particle retention, respectively (
Figure
1
E). Our results showed that EVs facilitate
the resistance of proteins to environmental stress.
Figure 1
Prevalence of allergenic
species-derived EVs in household dust.
(A) TEM images of EVs in household dust. Dust EVs were extracted from
rural (
n
= 5) and urban (
n
= 5)
areas in five provinces including Fujian (FJ), Henan (HA), Sichuan
(SC), Shaanxi (SN), and Shanxi (SX). The red arrow indicates the single-bilayer
EVs, while the yellow arrow denotes the OIMVs. Scale bar = 50 nm.
(B) Size distribution of EVs by NanoFCM. The band represents the standard
deviation. (C) Correlations among bacteria, fungi, particle concentration
of EVs and the ratio of EV particles to proteins. (D) Particle number
of dust EVs stored at room temperature for 0, 10, 25, and 50 days
(
n
= 3). Concentration of dust EV-associated proteins
and supernatant proteins (non-EVs) after long-term storage at room
temperature. All EVs were placed in EP tubes and stored under controlled
laboratory conditions at 25 °C with relative humidity 40–60%.
(E) Particle number of EVs from untreated, heated, and PK groups (
n
= 3). (F) PCoA plots of the Bray–Curtis distance
of biological composition at the genus level. Each dot represents
one sample. Colors were used to distinguish the rural and urban areas,
and the symbol of circle and plus indicated the dust samples and its
derived EVs samples, respectively. Ellipses represented the 95% confidence
interval (95% CI). (G) Distribution of allergenic species in dust
and their EV-associated DNA. The Venn diagram indicates the number
of allergenic species, while the bar graph shows the relative abundance
of allergenic species. (H) The number of predicted allergenic species
in dust and EVs in rural and urban areas. (I) The relative abundance
of allergenic species-associated DNA in dust and derived EVs in rural
and urban areas. Each dot represents one allergenic species. “ns”
P
> 0.05, *
P
< 0.05, **
P
< 0.01, ***
P
< 0.001.
We tracked the source of EVs through metagenomics
sequencing of
both dust DNA and corresponding EV-associated DNA. In dust samples,
the average reads of 81.8, 11.7, and 6.3% were annotated as bacteria,
archaea, and eukaryotes, respectively (
Figure S3
). The majority of dust EV-associated DNA were derived from
bacteria (83.6%), eukaryotes (0.9%), and archaea (0.3%). Principal
coordinates analysis (PCoA) showed that the taxonomic composition
of EV-associated DNA was more similar between urban and rural samples
compared to their source dust DNA (
Figure
1
F). It was noteworthy that a total of 196
allergenic species were identified from the dust samples using the
reference list containing 784 species compiled from four widely used
databases (
Table S4
). Of these, 143 species
were found to be sources of EVs, suggesting that the majority of allergenic
species secrete EVs in the indoor dust environment (
Figure
1
G). The source of EVs covers
all three common taxonomic units of allergenic species commonly found
indoors, including microorganisms (e.g.,
S. aureus
,
Aspergillus
), plants (e.g.,
A.
annua
,
Ambrosia
), and animals (e.g.,
D. farinae
,
Blattella
). The number
and relative abundance of these allergenic species-associated DNA
in dust, as well as their EVs, were significantly higher in urban
than in rural areas (
Figure
1
H–I). In detail, all three common taxonomic units showed
higher abundance in urban areas compared to that in rural areas (
Figure S4
).
3.2
Household
Dust EVs Carry a Variety of Allergens
We then investigated
whether indoor dust EVs carry allergens that
directly induce allergic responses. The EV-associated amino acid translated
from the metagenomic data was predicted 1041 allergen sequence matches.
Metaproteomic analysis identified 952 unique peptides and 566 protein
groups in indoor dust EVs, primarily derived from bacteria (64.3%),
metazoans (27.6%), and viridiplantae (5.2%) (
Figure
2
A). Among them, 28 allergenic species, covering
all three common taxonomic units, possessed a total relative abundance
of 14.0%, with a range of 0.1–0.6% for microorganisms, 0.1–2.9%
for plants, and 0.1–1.9% for animals (
Figure
2
B). We identified and predicted 95 dust EV-associated
allergens with strong (
n
= 85) and weak (
n
= 10) evidence for allergenicity according to our identification
workflow (
Figure S5, Table S5
). Subcellular
localization analysis revealed that 39 (41.1%) EV-associated allergens
were located in the extracellular space, 25 (26.3%) in the cytoplasmic
space, and 20 (21.1%) in the nuclear space, with the remainder distributed
across chloroplast, mitochondrial, and plasma membrane compartments
(
Figure
2
C). Forty
EV-associated protein groups were identical to known allergens including
EV protein markers, such as HSP70 (heat shock protein 70), GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase), and TPI1 (triosephosphate isomerase) (
Table S5
). Interestingly, the relative abundance
of 95 dust EV-associated allergens was significantly lower in rural
areas than in urban areas (
Figure
2
D). Dust EV-associated allergens possessed allergenic
activity, as confirmed by ELISA assays of three common allergens,
SEs from
S. aureus
, Art v 1 from
A. annua
, and Der f 1 from
D. farinae
(
Figure
2
E). These
three species were also selected as representatives to analyze the
proportion of released allergens in the states of EVs compared to
the non-EV supernatant. The morphological characteristics of the three
species are presented in
Figure S6A
. Their
EVs exhibited a typical cup-shaped morphology with an average diameter
of 77.2 ± 7.8 nm (
Figure S6B,C
). The
average particle number of secreted EVs was 12.8 EVs/CFU of
S. aureus
in the exponential growth phase (
Table S6
). About 1.3 × 10
10
EVs
per gram pollen were released during pollen hydration in sterilized
rainwater, and 3.8 × 10
10
particles per gram were
released by
D. farinae
(
Table S6
). Correlation analysis revealed a significant
positive correlation between the EV particle number and protein content
(
Figure S7
). To be noted, in contrast to
previous methods for the extraction of EVs from pollen, we simulated
pollen hydration under natural conditions and found that pollen released
significant amounts of EVs. Specifically, the total secreted allergens
were divided into the states of EVs and the non-EV supernatant. Considering
that ultracentrifugation could result in a 40–90% loss of EVs,
52
−
54
EVs could account for 1.6–6.0% of all extracellular SEs,
3.5–18.0% of Art v 1, and 1.6–9.0% of Der f 1 (
Figure
2
F).
Figure 2
Allergens from household
dust EVs and the proportion of major allergens
in typical allergenic species. (A) Statistical classification of dust
EV-associated protein group sources at the kingdom and phylum level
using Sankey plots. The heights of the rectangles indicate the relative
abundance of taxonomic categories. (B) Relative abundance of dust
EV-associated protein groups derived from allergenic species. (C)
The number of predicted EV-associated allergens and other protein
groups. The radial bar chart shows the subcellular location of the
95 predicted EV-associated allergens. (D) The relative abundance of
predicted EV allergens and other protein groups in rural and urban
dust EVs. Each dotted line represents one protein group. (E) The concentration
of allergens (SEs, Art v 1 and Der f 1) in dust EVs by ELISA kits.
(F) The relative abundance of EV-associated allergens in the three
allergenic species. ***
P
< 0.001.
3.3
EVs Act as Allergen Carriers across Varied
Allergenic Species
We next analyzed the prevalence of allergens
carried by EVs using proteomic data from 18 allergenic species covering
all three common taxonomic units (
Figure
3
A). The EV-associated protein groups were
aligned with their respective full sequences following our workflow,
resulting in a predicted data set of EV-associated allergens. A total
of 540 protein groups with strong (
n
= 382) and weak
(
n
= 158) evidence for allergenicity were predicted
from 7881 EV-associated protein groups (
Figure
3
A,
Table S7
).
Among them, 71 EV-associated protein groups were identical to the
known allergens. The proportion of predicted EV-associated allergens
varied from 1.3% (
S. aureus
) to 67.8%
(
D. farinae
) of the total number of
protein groups (
Table S7
). The predicted
EV-associated allergens included clinically significant allergens
such as heat shock proteins, dehydrogenases, and aldolases (
Table S7
). Within the data set, numerous unique
allergens from each allergenic species could be identified (
Table S7
), and most EV-associated allergens were
located in cytoplasmic (381, 70.1%) and extracellular space (76, 14.1%)
(
Figure
3
B).
Figure 3
Data analysis
of allergenic species-derived EV-associated allergens.
(A) The number of predicted EV-associated allergens from different
allergenic species with strong and weak evidence for allergenicity.
(B) Subcellular localization and number of the 540 predicted EV-associated
allergens. (C) Subcellular localization of the 28 types of EV protein
markers predicted as allergens. Pie chart shows the proportion of
different subcellular localizations.
It is intriguing that allergens are carried by
EVs. To investigate
whether EV protein markers are allergens, we matched the top 100 EV
protein markers from EVpedia with known allergens.
30
Twenty-eight EV markers were found to be allergens, with
20 having strong evidence and 8 having weak evidence for allergenicity
(
Figure
3
B,
Table S8
). Notably, the classical EV marker HSP70
55
was commonly associated with allergens (
Tables S5, S7, S8
). The majority of EV-associated
proteins were found to be identical to allergens (
Tables S4, S6, and S7
). The subcellular localization of the
28 types of EV protein markers showed that 22 (78.6%) were localized
in the cytoplasm, 4 (14.3%) were localized in the extracellular space,
and 2 (7.1%) were localized in the nuclear and mitochondrial space
(
Figure
3
C).
3.4
EVs Enhance Inflammatory Response In Vitro
We then
sought to ascertain the allergenicity of EVs on pulmonary
epithelial cells with BEAS-2B cells. The exposure concentrations of
allergenic species-derived EVs were calculated based on the maximum
daily exposure dose and a 10-fold lower dose. Fluorescence label tracking
confirmed that BEAS-2B cells internalized the DiO-EVs after 6 h coincubation
(
Figure
4
A). EVs derived
from
S. aureus
,
A. annua
pollen, and
D. farinae
all led to
elevated levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-1β and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-α expression in a dose-dependent manner
(
Figure
4
B–D).
EVs also exhibited significantly stronger pro-inflammatory potential
compared to the supernatant (non-EV components) at equivalent protein
concentrations (
Figure
4
B–D). To confirm the essential role of intact EVs, their structure
was disrupted using zirconium bead grinding (
Figure S8
). Intact EVs demonstrated significantly higher pro-inflammatory
potential than broken EVs at equivalent doses (
Figure
4
B–D).
Figure 4
Effects of allergenic species-derived
EVs on human lung epithelial
cells. The cells were exposed to different concentrations of EVs (0,
1, and 10 μg). (A) Confocal laser microscopic images of BEAS-2B
cells after 6 h exposure to DiO-labeled EVs (green). The nuclei were
labeled with DAPI (blue) and the cytoskeleton with rhodamine (red).
Scale bar = 20 μm. ELISA was used to measure the levels of IL-6,
IL-8, IL-1β, and TNF-α secreted by BEAS-2B cells following
exposure to EVs derived from
S. aureus
(B),
A. annua
pollen (C), and
D. farinae
(D) (
n
= 3). “ns”
P
> 0.05. *
P
< 0.05, **
P
< 0.01, ***
P
< 0.001.
3.5
EVs Favor the Tissue Distribution and Allergic
Airway Inflammation in Mice
IVIS was used to track the tissue
distribution of pollen EVs in the mice model. Whole-mouse fluorescence
imaging demonstrated signal concentration in the nasal regions, abdomen,
and limbs involved in nasal scratching (
Figure
5
A). The organs were collected and examined
ex vivo, revealing a rapid, pronounced accumulation of DiR-EVs predominantly
in the lungs and gastrointestinal tract (
Figure
5
B,C). Then, mice were immunized with extract,
EVs, and supernatant, respectively (
Figure
5
D). We observed that mice in the extract,
EVs and supernatant groups all exhibited frequent nasal scratching
and sneezing with no evidence of runny nose. Their behavior score
was significantly higher than that of the PBS group (
Figure
5
E). EVs elicited a more obvious
phenotype than the supernatant (
Figure
5
E). HE staining of lung specimens showed a large number
of inflammatory cells surrounding the airways and vessels in all allergenic
groups, except the PBS group (
Figure
5
F). HE staining of the nasal mucosa appeared with a
minor presence of inflammatory cell infiltration and mucosal epithelial
hyperemia observed in the three allergenic groups (
Figure
5
F). Higher serum total IgE,
sIgE, IgG2a, and IgG1 levels were detected in the three allergenic
groups than in the PBS group, and EVs elicited a stronger effect than
the supernatant (
Figure
5
G,H). The total IgE levels in the EVs group were significantly higher
than those in the extract group. The presence of representative Th2
cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) was detected in the BALF (
Figure
5
I). Accordingly,
a significant increase of the cytokine levels was observed in the
allergenic groups compared to the PBS group, with the EVs group higher
than the extract group and supernatant group.
Figure 5
Tissue distribution and
allergenic activity of
A.
annua
pollen-derived EVs. (A) Representative IVIS
image of intranasal administration of 1 × 10
10
particles/gram
body weight of DiR-EVs to a live mouse after 1 h and PBS-treated control
(
n
= 3). (B) Following in vivo imaging of PBS or
DiR-EVs mice, whole major organs (brain, heart, lungs, liver, spleen,
kidneys, and tract) were excised and imaged ex vivo. Representative
ex vivo images are shown. Organs are annotated on the left. (C) Quantitative
analysis of ex vivo imaging data of organs from PBS-treated and EV-treated
mice. Individual regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn for each organ
to obtain the respective fluorescence signals. Fluorescence signal
is expressed as total radiant efficiency [p/s]/[μW/cm
2
] per gram of tissue. (D) Protocol for modeling allergic airway inflammation
in mice (
n
= 5). (E) The nasal symptom scores were
different groups. (F) HE staining of paraffin-embedded lung and nasal
mucosa sections. Black arrows indicated inflammatory cell infiltration,
while yellow arrows indicated areas of congestion. (G, H) Serum levels
of total IgE, allergen-specific IgE, IgG2a, and IgG1 were measured
by ELISA. (I) Cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) in BALF were measured
by ELISA. *
P
< 0.05, **
P
<
0.01, ***
P
< 0.001.
4
Discussion
In this study, we found
that allergens can be encompassed within
EVs distributed in indoor dust. Data compilation confirmed the widespread
existence of allergens in EVs across a variety of allergenic species.
EV-associated allergens gained higher stability and stronger activation
of allergic responses compared to the non-EVs fraction. EVs are carriers
and functional units of environmental allergens in the field.
Indoor dust triggers allergic responses due to widely distributed
allergens.
56
Further investigation is required
to elucidate the patterns of allergen presence in the environment.
Our study revealed widespread EVs in indoor dust samples from five
Chinese provinces, with levels comparable to previous studies
15
,
21
and in soil samples.
20
The taxonomic
compositions of EV sources were similar across various regions. Most
allergenic species release EVs into indoor dust. The higher abundance
of allergenic species and their EVs were observed in urban than rural
areas, consistent with the higher urban prevalence of allergies.
57
Environment and lifestyle affect immune tolerance,
58
and the abundance of dust EVs was influenced
by various environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, and
air pollutants. They may directly or indirectly influence the secretion
of EVs by affecting the cellular structures or metabolism. It is worth
noting that due to the limited sample size, this correlation may not
be universally applicable. Metaproteomics identified EVs as carriers
of common indoor allergenic proteins, which was further confirmed
by ELISA assays, demonstrating the allergenic activity of EV-associated
allergens. The bilayer membrane vesicles could protect allergens from
degradation by environmental proteases, increasing their half-life
and enabling them to travel further distances. These insights enhance
our understanding of the allergen status in the environment.
To obtain a comprehensive allergen database, we integrated four
major allergen databases and developed a strict identification workflow.
We employed a 50% pairwise identity cutoff, known as a reliable predictor
for cross-reactivity and potential allergenicity, and further compared
protein structures.
59
The database and
identification workflow are expected to provide strong support for
extensive environmental allergen prediction. Our analysis identified
40 known allergens and predicted 55 potential allergens from dust
EV-associated proteins. The health risk posed by indoor allergens
is challenging due to immunological cross-reactivity among similar
proteins.
60
,
61
Allergens in invertebrates like house dust
mites and cockroaches share similarities with those in shrimp and
shellfish, potentially causing unexpected allergic reactions.
62
,
63
To be noted, 28 of the top 100 EV markers were identified as allergens.
This implies that EVs may naturally carry homologous allergenic proteins,
contributing to their allergenicity.
D. farinae
exosomes have been demonstrated to induce allergic airway inflammation.
18
Olive pollen EVs exhibited allergenic activity
by binding patient IgE and were detected in aerobiological samples.
19
Further analysis revealed that up to 18% of
allergens were associated with EVs. These findings suggest that EVs
from allergenic species are common carriers of allergenic proteins.
Allergens can penetrate the epithelium through various mechanisms.
Several allergens possessing enzymatic activity can disrupt epithelial
barriers, increasing permeability and thus facilitating allergen entry
into the epithelium of patients with allergic disease.
64
,
65
Pollen allergen can bind to the conjunctival epithelium and then
be internalized.
66
Our in vitro and in
vivo models demonstrated that EVs can efficiently transport allergens
into the epithelium. Intranasally administered EVs rapidly reach the
lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and other tissues. This showed the
role of EVs as efficient carriers for allergens to enter the human
body via multiple contact routes. Interestingly, the human epithelium
exposed to allergens can release EVs that deliver allergens to dendritic
cells (DCs) for antigen presentation.
67
DC-derived EVs subsequently present the allergens and induce allergic
responses.
68
Thus, EVs provide a vesicle-mediated
pathway that facilitates the entire sensitization process, including
the release and presence of environmental allergens, penetration of
the epithelium, antigen presentation, and subsequent allergic responses.
As potent mediators, EVs have been shown to enhance the biological
activity of their cargoes.
69
We also found
that EVs enhance the allergenic activity of allergens compared with
broken EVs. The codelivery of multiple allergens, as well as other
molecules within a vesicle, may enhance allergic sensitization through
adjuvant activity and cross-reactivity.
Given the multifactorial
influence of the environment on allergy,
further research is needed. Whether climate and environmental changes
increase the production of allergen-harboring EVs, thereby altering
the sensitization to environmental allergens. Whether aero-chemicals
can act as adjuvants or inhibitors when combined with EV-associated
allergens.
70
Their combined effect with
EV-associated allergens was warranted to assess the true allergic
activity of an indoor environment. Taken together, our findings reveal
that allergen-harboring EVs from allergenic species are widespread
and stable in household dust. Allergens are common components of EVs
across various allergenic species. EV-associated allergens can penetrate
the airway epithelium and be transported to other tissues, contributing
to increased allergenicity and inflammation exacerbation. Natural
EVs serve as effective carriers and functional units of environmental
allergens that facilitate allergic responses. It should be taken into
consideration during the risk assessment and control of allergy. Our
study provides mechanistic insights into the strategy for risk estimation,
prevention, and therapy.
5
Environmental Implication
Our work
highlights the environmental and public health impacts
of EVs as emerging allergic units. Allergen-harboring EVs from allergenic
species are widespread and stable in household dust on a broad scale.
Allergens are common components of EVs across various allergenic species.
This provides a novel pathway for allergens to persist and interact
with the environment. EVs can be a ubiquitous carrier of functional
molecules including proteins, metabolites, and nucleic acids in the
environmental matrix.
EV-associated allergens can penetrate
the airway epithelium and
be transported to other tissues, contributing to increase allergenicity
and inflammation exacerbation. Natural EVs serve as effective carriers
and functional units of environmental allergens, facilitating allergic
responses. Unlike larger particles, such as pollen, bacteria, or fungi,
the small size and stability of EVs allow them to evade standard air
filtration systems, posing unique challenges for engineering controls.
In addition, EVs are complex hybrid vectors, and the codelivery of
toxic substances within them can lead to unexpected effects. These
characteristics not only increase their allergenicity but also complicate
traditional risk assessment and mitigation strategies. Exploring the
mechanisms by which EVs mediate allergen delivery and exacerbate immune
responses is crucial to the development of targeted therapeutic interventions.
These factors should be considered in the allergy risk assessment
and control. Our study provides field and mechanistic insights into
the strategy for risk estimation and prevention of allergy in the
environment.