1
Introduction
In April 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) warned about
cases of severe hepatitis in some children in the United Kingdom.
Most of the identified cases intensified in Europe and the world scenario;
cases were detected in several countries in Europe, United States,
and Asia.
1
,
2
It was a hepatitis with a high degree of
severity specifically affecting children and of unknown etiology that
differs it from other existing hepatitis.
3
,
4
In diagnosing these cases, routine tests to assess liver damage,
such as the transaminase index, demonstrated positive results, but
immunoserology for viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E) and
autoantibodies for autoimmune hepatitis were negative in all patients
evaluated, characterizing it as hepatitis of unknown origin, non-HepA-E
hepatitis.
5
The appearance of cases
of non-HepA-E hepatitis in children generates
a negative impact on the health system, given the difficulty in treatment
due to the uncertainty of a specific target, as occurs in other hepatitis
already known, as well as the rapid worsening of the disease often
generates severe liver damage such as fibrosis and thus increases
the chances of needing a transplant.
6
,
7
It is
hypothesized that an immune-mediated response in the liver
may be the key to understanding the main etiology where non-HepA-E
hepatitis is established.
8
Some of the
cases reported in the scientific literature demonstrated previous
infection with adenovirus,
9
in addition
to other viruses such as adeno-associated virus-2 (AAV-2), human herpesvirus-6
(HHV-6),
10
,
11
syncytial virus respiratory, and influenza
A virus,
12
and other patients had a history
of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection.
13
,
14
A postinfectious
hepatic immune response is suggested, which could
generate an exacerbated inflammatory process similar to that which
occurs in Pediatric Multisystemic Inflammatory Syndrome (P-SIM), possibly
caused by immune dysregulation and consequently the formation of T-cell
activating superantigens.
15
,
16
The study of
proteins involved in the pathophysiological processes
of hepatitis of already known etiology (HepA-E) has proven to be of
great importance, given the versatility that these biomolecules have
in acting in important biochemical pathways such as in immune processes,
replication of pathogenic agents, and cell signaling.
17
−
19
Proteins can become important molecular therapeutic targets
for
choosing possible treatment strategies, in addition to establishing
themselves as excellent biomarkers for a better clinical diagnosis.
20
Mass spectrometry is a promising technique,
especially in clinical proteomics, and has been promoting the identification
of proteins related to the pathophysiology of hepatitis, as well as
those promising as possible biomarkers and potential inhibitors of
disease progression.
21
As it is a
rare and recently identified pathology, the few cases
compared to other hepatitis make it difficult to obtain a greater
number of samples of non-HepA-E hepatitis. Given these factors, the
objective of this article was to study a clinical case of this disease,
seeking to analyze, through label-free proteomics, proteins possibly
involved in pathophysiological processes as well as elucidate associated
factors that induce the infectious process and the progression of
liver damage.
2
Results
2.1
Proteomic
Data Analysis and Statistical Analysis
In total, 206 proteins
were identified, of which 72 were differentially
expressed proteins (DEPs). From the identification of DEPS, 45 proteins
were upregulated and 27 downregulated in the positive sample for hepatitis
non-HepA-E. Furthermore, the Gremlin-1 (GREM1) protein was identified
as exclusive in the positive sample (max fold charge infinity). Among
the upregulated DEPs were immune system proteins such as immunoglobulin
gamma, alpha, delta, heavy, and various light chain variables Kappa
and Lambda, respectively in addition to other proteins such as TRAF3-interacting
protein 1, galectin-3-binding protein, and carboxypeptidase N.
Viral proteins were also detected, which were mostly related to viral
replication processes. Within the upregulated proteins, we detected
replication protein E1 from human papillomavirus 30 and nonstructural
polyprotein 1A from human astrovirus-1. And with downregulation, we
detected RNA-directed RNA polymerase L from the Seoul virus (strain
80–39), RNA-directed RNA polymerase L from human respiratory
syncytial virus B (strain B1), hemagglutinin from the influenza A
virus (strain A/Japan/305/1957 H2N2), and the replicase polyprotein
1ab from human coronavirus NL63.
The identified downregulated
proteins include complement cascade
proteins (complement C1r subcomponent, C3, C4-A, C4-B, C5, component
C8 alpha chain, component C8 beta chain, factor I, and factor B),
several apolipoproteins (APOA1, APOA2, APOA4, APOB-100, APOC2, APOC3,
and L1), as well as other proteins that interact with apolipoproteins,
such as hemopexin (HPX) and haptoglobin (HP). Some other proteins
associated with the coagulation cascade were also identified as alpha-2-antiplasmin
(SERPINF2), plasma serine protease inhibitor (SERPINA5), interalpha-trypsin
inhibitor heavy chain H1 (ITIH1), interalpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy
chain H4 (ITIH4), plasminogen (PLG), heparin cofactor 2 (SERPIND1),
and coagulation factor X (F10).
Extracellular superoxide dismutase
[Cu–Zn] (SOD3) was also
downregulated, being an enzyme belonging to the antioxidant complex
and important in fighting free radicals. Through the heat map (
Figure
1
b) obtained by analyses
carried out by the PERSEUS software, we can observe that there was
a greater amount of upregulated proteins compared to the standard.
Figure 1
(a) Volcano
plot. Distribution of DEPs with greater significance
was compared between test and control samples. On the
x
-axis, we used log2 of Folder charge and on the
y
-axis −log10
p
-value. (b) Heat map of DEPs,
showing upregulated (
z
-score values: from 0 to 2)
and downregulated (
z
-score values: from 0 to −2)
proteins. Non-HepA-E hepatitis (positive) replicates: P01, P02, and
P03. Control (negative) replicates: N01, N02, and N03.
After statistical analysis, the results showed which DEPs
were
significant when comparing the test and control samples. As we can
see through the q value, many of the proteins obtained a value below
0.01 [according to the false discovery rate (FDR) value established
at the time of analysis], which are considered significantly expressed.
Among those of greatest importance in upregulation were proteins associated
with the immune system, such as immunoglobulins, including gamma globulins,
alpha immunoglobulins, and some with variable light chain subunits
Kappa and Lambda, respectively (
Figure
1
a).
Of the most significantly upregulated viral
proteins were replication
protein E1 from human papillomavirus type 30, and no-structural polyprotein
1A from human astrovirus-1. The RNA-directed RNA polymerase L protein
from human respiratory syncytial virus B (strain B1) was downregulated
within the significance range.
Within the most significantly
downregulated DEPs, several proteins
of the complement cascade were identified, such as complement C5,
factor B, component C8 alpha chain, C8 beta chain, factor I, and component
C8 beta chain. Other proteins involved in oxidative stress such as
extracellular superoxide dismutase [Cu–Zn] and some related
to lipid transport, such as apolipoproteins A-I (APOA1), A-II (APOA2),
A-IV (APOA4), and C–III (APOC3), were also significantly downregulated.
We can observe that the correlation between the replicates in each
group, test, and control, respectively, were in the ideal margin,
if we take into account Pearson’s correlation values. In
Figure
2
, we can observe
that the correlation values between replicates of the same group were
above 0.9 both in the test and control groups.
Figure 2
MultiScatter plot with
Pearson’s correlation values between
replicates of hepatitis non-HepA-E (positive) and control (hepatitis
negative) test samples. Correlation values are highlighted in blue.
Hepatitis non-HepA-E (positive) replicates: HP_P_R1, HP_P_R2, and
HP_P_R3. Control replicates (negative): HP_N_R1, HP_N_R2, and HP_N_R3.
Through a multianalysis of the comparison between
all replicates
within each group, as well as comparisons made between replicates
from different groups, we can observe that the Pearson correlation
values between replicates from the same group (test × test/control
× control) showed better value, all above 0.96. As analyses were
carried out between replicates of different groups (test × control),
the correlation values decreased, reaching 0.77 (
Figure
2
).
2.2
Protein–Protein
Interaction and Functional
Analysis
Alpha-2-antiplasmin, one of the DEPs with downregulation
compared to the control sample, has direct interaction with other
proteins that strongly regulate the coagulation cascade and are correlated
with the formation of the extracellular matrix in fibrotic processes
such as interalpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H4 (ITIH4), inter-
alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H1 (ITIH1), plasminogen (PL),
heparin cofactor 2 (SERPIND1), plasma serine protease inhibitor (SERPINA5),
alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (AHSG), and the coagulation factor X (F10)
(
Figure
3
).
Figure 3
Protein–protein
interactome obtained from Cytoscape. Log(Fold
change) values show upregulated proteins in red and downregulated
proteins in blue.
We also observed that
several apolipoproteins identified as downregulated
interact with others of the same class but with upregulation, as can
be seen by the difference between the Log Fold change values (
Figure
4
b). In addition,
APOA1, APOA2, APOB, and APOH interact with haptoglobin (HP) and transthyretin
(TTR) and plasminogen (PLG), the latter proteins being important in
coagulation processes. We can observe this detail in the most connected
genes in the interaction network (hub genes) according to the degree
of interaction (
Figure
4
a).
Figure 4
(a) Hub genes: those equivalent to the most connected proteins
in the interaction network. (b) Cluster of interactions between apolipoproteins.
(c) Cluster of interactions between immunoglobulins. (d) Cluster of
interactions between proteins of the complement cascade.
Proteins associated with immune processes also showed clusters
of strong interaction. Some of the immunoglobulins found upregulated
were IGH5, IGHD, IGHV3-11, and JCHAIN (
Figure
4
c). And some were associated with the complement
cascade: C8A, C8B, C6, and C9 (
Figure
4
d).
In the functional analysis of pathways associated
with biological
processes, it was observed that most of the proteins analyzed act
in pathways involved in immunological processes, which can consequently
be correlated with the significant increase in the regulation of immunoglobulins,
mainly due to the negative regulation of complement proteins in our
MS/MS analyses (
Figure
5
).
Figure 5
Enrichment analysis of gene expression and biological processes
involved in the identified proteins. Upregulated protein enrichment
analysis (a) and downregulated protein enrichment analysis (b).
In addition, other identified proteins have a direct
interaction
with proteins classified as important cytokines in immune response
and inflammation mechanisms, such as the interaction of Gremlin-1
with TGF-β and TRAF3IP1 with TRAF3 and, consequently, with activators
of inflammation pathways and T cells such as TNF-α and NFKB.
With the evaluation of the cell signature by gene expression, it
was possible to identify the highest specificity of up- and downregulated
proteins with hepatocyte cell lines, with those of the C11, C14, and
C17 lineage
22
being those of higher prevalence
(
Figure
6
).
Figure 6
Analysis of
the cell signature enrichment by gene expression. Relationship
with C11, C14, and C17 hepatocyte lineages were the most prevalent.
Upregulated protein functional analysis (a). Downregulated protein
functional analysis (b).
Figure 7
Functional analysis and
specific tissue of protein action. The
liver was identified as the target organ for the DEPs analyzed. Upregulated
protein functional analysis in (a) and downregulated protein analysis
in (b).
As a specific tissue, the liver
was identified as the organ of
action of the processes to which the identified proteins are associated,
being strongly confirmed by the cellular signature of the hepatocytes,
which demonstrates that the events that occurred in the pathology
studied are correlated to the liver. (
Figure
7
).
3
Discussion
The Gremlin-1 protein (GREM1) was found only in the sample positive
for non-HepA-E hepatitis in all replicates analyzed and with upregulation.
The process of liver fibrosis is the chronic stage and the main aggravating
factor of the most diverse types of hepatopathologies, including hepatitis.
The upregulation of Gremlin-1 demonstrated its importance in the reduction
of hepatoprotection as well as in the possible induction of liver
fibrosis in some diseases that affect the liver due to its increased
expression. Gremlin-1 promotes an increase in transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-β) which consequently can increase the activation
of hepatic stellate cells causing fibrosis.
23
,
24
Other proteins considered to block TGF-β are of great
importance
in hepatoprotection, as they reduce liver damage, as occurs in fibrosis
resulting from hepatitis. Proteins such as BMP and activin membrane-bound
inhibitor homologue (BAMBI), which with the inhibitory action of TGF-β,
favor the signaling of important pathways that participate in the
process of reducing fibrogenesis.
25
,
26
Our results
also detected upregulation of alpha 2 antiplasmin (SERPINF2). In the
process of liver fibrogenesis, there is an increase in proteins such
as fibronectin and collagen that can lead to the formation of complexes
in the extracellular matrix (ECM) capable of altering the integrity
of liver cells.
27
,
28
Plasmin is characterized
as an important serine protease responsible
for the degradation of proteins present in the ECM structure, and
its main inhibitor is SERPINF2.
29
In fibrotic
processes, there is a large increase in proteins in the ECM and consequently
the need for plasmin action. Thus, negative regulation of SERPINF2
is capable of generating a significant increase in the proteolytic
enzyme plasmin in its activated form. In the study by Chan et al.,
(2006)
30
a decrease in the expression of
SERPINF2 was detected in patients infected with HBV in the acute phase.
Another protein possibly associated with liver damage and identified
with upregulation was TRA3-interacting protein 1 (TRAF3IP1) mainly
through direct interaction with other important cytokine signaling
proteins, such as TNF receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3). Hu et
al. (2016)
31
demonstrated that TRAF3 is
a potential protein in promoting liver damage and increased inflammation
via the mitogen-activated protein kinase 7 (MAP3K7)-dependent activation
pathway and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB).
The regulation of
important pathways related to NF-kB is defined
in autoimmune diseases, as the increase in its signaling contributes
to autoimmunity and chronic inflammatory processes by activating T
cells.
32
,
33
Thus, there is the possibility of TRAF3
in the direct activation of immune complexes by cytokine signaling,
lymphocyte-mediated immune response, and consequent increase in hepatic
hyperimmune activity.
The overexpression of immunoglobulins
(Ig) present in the test
sample (non-HepAE hepatitis) demonstrates the possible hepatic hyperimmune
response similar to cases of autoimmune hepatitis.
34
Because in addition to the significant increase in the
expression of Ig, mainly alpha and gamma chain globulins (IgG), they
can be an indication of the immune response in the liver due to the
presence of possible infectious agents that promote the function of
triggers.
35
The downregulation of
complement cascade proteins suggests a dysregulation
of the immune system due to a deficiency in the elimination of immune
complexes, which favors the process of immunopathogenesis.
36
These factors automatically trigger an inability
to eliminate immune complexes and cells that are important for the
apoptosis process, thus being able to stimulate the synthesis of autoantibodies
in the affected tissue. In addition, the effect of generating immune
complexes brings with it the high possibility of generating autoantigens
and consequently an increase in the hepatic immune-mediated response.
37
Furthermore, given the possibility that
pathogens of viral origin
are correlated with the dissemination and severity of non-HepA-E hepatitis,
we sought to verify which proteins could act as a trigger for a hepatic
hyperimmune response but were unsuccessful in this study. We can highlight
in the scientific literature the identification that some children
diagnosed with hepatitis non-HepA-E had previous infection with Sars-CoV-2,
in addition to others with the potential to activate an exacerbated
immune response, such as adenovirus and other variants of SARS-CoV-2.
5
,
13
,
38
We can take into account
the possibility that biomolecules such
as structural and nonstructural proteins of viruses, such as those
found in this study, become superantigens capable of generating signaling
in important cells of the immune system such as T cells, thus generating
a hyperimmune reaction response in liver tissue initiating the acute
phase of the disease.
15
,
39
The possibility of preinfection
by more than one different virus, such as adenovirus, adeno-associated
virus, and SARS-CoV-2, could also be an important factor correlated
with the formation of superantigens and, consequently, greater T-cell
immunomediation and increased of liver damage.
12
A galectin-3 binding protein (LGALS3BP) was also
significantly
increased in the non-HepAE acute hepatitis sample of the present study.
LGALS3BP has been described in the scientific literature as being
associated with liver diseases such as cirrhosis and NAFLD nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease.
40
It is considered
a potential biomarker for NAFLD in addition to being related to the
progression of liver disease causing cirrhosis and mainly fibrosis
in the liver affected by HCV.
41
,
42
Thus, the increase
in LGALS3BP may be correlated with the rapid increase in severity
characteristic of non-HepAE hepatitis, mainly due to the association
of this protein with fibrogenesis in liver diseases.
Starting
from proteins mainly associated with lipid transport and
so important in cholesterol metabolism, we observed that many apolipoproteins
identified were negatively regulated, as well as the negative regulation
of haptoglobin and hemopexin, proteins strongly involved in the activity
of apolipoproteins.
43
The decrease in all
of these proteins shows that a possible increase in cholesterol and
triglycerides correlates with an increase in liver damage seen in
high-severity hepatitis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
44
,
45
Patients with high fibrogenesis tend to have reduced expression
of some apolipoproteins. It has been reported that APOC2 and APOC4
proteins are decreased in patients with advanced fibrosis due to nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease—aggravated NAFLD.
46
Other apolipoproteins such as APOB (apolipoprotein B-100) also correlate
with liver disease in its aggravated stage. Proteins such as APOA2
and haptoglobin, in addition to having interaction pathways with each
other, are also associated with acute inflammatory responses, being
one of the main causes that favor the progression of hepatopathologies.
Extracellular superoxide dismutase [Cu–Zn] (SOD3) was identified
as an upregulation in our study, suggesting an increase in the formation
of free radicals in the hepatic tissue during the worsening of hepatitis
non-HepA-E, a consequence that possibly favors the progression process
of liver damage as well as increased cell signaling and interference
with tissue repair.
SOD3, as well as other enzymes related to
the antioxidant system,
is important in protecting cells and tissues by direct action against
free radicals, which are formed in an exacerbated way as a result
of physiological changes often caused by infections and various pathologies.
47
Severe liver damage, as occurs in hepatitis,
is capable of increasing the formation of superoxide ions and the
upregulation of antioxidant enzymes, thus increasing oxidative stress.
48
4
Conclusions
The
study of the plasma proteome allowed us to investigate the
mechanisms that possibly favor the rapid worsening of non-HepA-E hepatitis
in children as well as some respiratory viruses as potential biological
triggers of the disease. We demonstrated the possibility of high-resolution
mass spectrometry proteomics as a promising tool in the prediction
of severity level as well as therapeutic targets for the control of
liver fibrosis in potential cases of non-HepA-E hepatitis and other
rapidly progressive liver diseases. Further studies with a larger
number of samples aiming to determine biomarker proteins, as well
as those associated with viral pathogens as possible causes, show
promise.
5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Experimental
Design and Obtaining Clinical
Samples
We performed a clinical case study approach focusing
on non-HepA-E hepatitis. Two plasma samples were used: a positive
sample (test sample) and a negative sample serving as a control. Both
samples were obtained from patients of Instituto de Medicina Integral
Professor Fernando Figueira—IMIP Hospital (Recife, PE—Brazil).
A 13 month-old female child who initially tested positive for hepatitis
A, B, C, D, and E was selected for the positive sample. The analysis
included transaminase indices, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), along with immunoserological testing
for viral hepatitis. The negative sample was obtained from another
female child, aged 16 months, who also underwent the same tests and
was diagnosed without any hepatitis. All samples were obtained after
approval by the Research Ethics Committee (CEP) of the Federal University
of Pernambuco, Brazil, for studies with biological samples from human
beings.
5.2
Sample Preparation
5.2.1
Depletion
and Precipitation
The
albumin and immunoglobulin G (IgG) depletion of the plasma samples
was carried out using the Albumin and IgG Depletion SpinTrap Kit (Cytiva,
ref 28-9480-20). To quantify total proteins, the Pierce BCA Protein
Assay kit (Thermo ref 23225) was used, with dilution 10/20 times,
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For the execution
of the following processing procedures, a maximum concentration of
100 μg of protein for 100 μL of the sample was established.
Subsequently, the process of protein precipitation and cleaning of
the samples was carried out to eliminate possible nonprotein interferents
using the 2-D Cean-Up Kit (Cytiva, ref 80-6484-51).
5.2.2
Proteolytic Digestion
The proteolytic
digestion process was carried out using trypsin as a cleavage enzyme.
Initially, to break the hydrophobic interactions, the previously processed
pellets were resuspended with 50 μL of 8 M urea. Then, to reduce
disulfide bonds, 2,5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added, vortexed, and
incubated for 30 min at 30 °C. Subsequently, 2,5 μL of
300 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark
to carry out the alkylation of the disulfide bonds.
After, 350
μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and 10 μL of
Trypsin Gold Promega (0.5 μg/μL) were added, followed
by incubation in a water bath (37 °C) overnight for 18 h. Subsequently,
centrifugation was performed at 11,000
g
for 10 min
at 4 °C, where the supernatant was transferred to LoBind tubes.
The tubes were taken to speedVac for considerable volume reduction
and stored in an ultrafreezer at −80 °C until use in the
following steps.
5.3
Proteomic Analysis
5.3.1
LC–MS/MS Analysis
The analyses
were carried out in high-performance liquid chromatography using the
M-Class ACQUITY UPLC nanoflow system (Waters Corporation, USA) coupled
to a Hybrid Quadrupole Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer (ESI-qTOF
MS/MS) model SYNAPT XS (Walters) for tryptic peptides fractionation.
As the stationary phase, three columns were used: the first dimension
is a first 1D column (5 μm nanoEase M/Z Peptide BEH130 C18,
300 μm × 50 mm) operating at 2 μL/min. In this first
stage, mobile phase A was used, containing additional water and 0.1%
(v/v) formic acid, and mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile.
The peptides were then eluted and separated by 5 fractions of mobile
phase B (11.4, 14.7, 17.4, 20.7, and 50%) for 70 min each, for 9.5
min charging rate.
In the second dimension, a nanoflow Trap
column was used (5 μm NanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18, 180 μm
× 20 mm) coupled to a third analytical type column (1.8 μm
nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3, 75 μm × 150 mm), with an operating
mode of 0.4 μL/min and a temperature of 35 °C. For the
elution of the peptides, 2 flows were performed: the first with 3–45%
of mobile phase B for 46 min and the second with acceleration of mobile
phase B to 90% lasting 4 min and then an equilibrium at 3% of mobile
phase B for 20 min.
The system was coupled to a Hybrid Quadrupole
Time-of-Flight Mass
Spectrometer (Q-ToF MS/MS) model SYNAPT XS (Waters Corporation, United
Kingdom). Mass spectra with the mass/charge ratio (
m
/
z
) were obtained and the positive mode of operation
of the mass spectrometer with a resolution of 30.000, fwhm. The ESI
low flow probe was operated with the following parameters: capillary
voltage of 3 kV; source offset of 30 V; source temperature of 100
°C; sampling cone of 40 V; and cone gas of 50 L/min.
Ionic
fragmentation was carried out in a collision chamber with
argon gas, and ion mobility was used to separate possible ions equivalent
to peptides belonging to protein isoforms using helium gas for this
process. The time-of-flight (ToF) mass analyzer was externally calibrated
with NaCsI from
m
/
z
50 to 2000.
And a mass reference signal locking GluFibrinopeptide B (
m
/
z
785.8426) was obtained every 30 s. Data were
acquired using the UDMSE acquisition mode, and all data were acquired
in triplicate.
5.4
Proteomic Data Analysis
Data analysis
was performed using the PROGENESIS QI (Nlinear Dynamics) Waters software,
version: 4.7, to identify proteins through deconvolution of the raw
mass spectra obtained. All proteins present in the sample were determined
using the UniProt (Universal Protein Knowledgebase) database for proteins
from the species
Homo sapiens
—human (downloaded
on November 26, 2022).
For initial processing, the following
parameters were used: fixed modification of carbamidomethyl to cysteine
(Cys), variable modification in methionine oxidation (Met), maximum
protein mass value of 650 kDa, and loss of trypsin cleavage. Proteins
were then identified using a search threshold of 2 minimum peptides
per protein, 2 minimum fragments per peptide, 5 minimum fragments
per protein, and a FDR = 1.
A total of three most abundant peptides
for all identified proteins
(Hi-label-free method) were used as a procedure for relative quantification.
Only proteins with confidence interval values and frequency scores
above 99% are considered viable for investigation in the databases.
Results such as mass, peptide quantity, unique peptides, and normalized
abundance values were determined. The matrix resulting from preprocessing
and identification in Progenesis was imported into the Perseus software
(MaxQuant) for data filtering and statistical analysis.
5.5
Statistical Analysis
PERSEUS software
version 2.0.7.0 (MaxQuant) was used to perform statistical analyses.
49
After importing the matrix into Perseus, a logarithmic
transformation was performed in base 2 (log2(
x
))
to ensure a normal distribution of values. Subsequently, the columns
with the data were filtered into valid values (in each of the sample
groups), and a categorical annotation of lines was made. After these
steps, a Student’s
t
-test was performed for
two test samples with minimum values of Fold Charge (s0) = 1.5 and
FDR = 0.01. Thus, it was possible to determine the distribution of
differentially expressed DEP proteins (criteria:
p
value < 0.05 and LogFC < −0.37 or >0.37), correlation
between replicates of each sample (using MultiScatter graph with correlation
values Pearson), and significance level of protein expressions by
volcano graph. Next, a
Z
-score was performed to create
a heat map to show the distribution of DEPs between the replicates
of each sample.
5.6
Protein–Protein
Interaction and Functional
Analysis
Functional analysis was performed using Cytoscape
software version 3.10.2, using protein accession codes (UniProt) to
generate the protein–protein interaction network. The Omics
visualizer plugin was used to identify DEPs in the main interaction
network by using the Log(Fold change) values of each protein. To identify
hubs, we used the M code plugin, and to determine the most connected
genes in the network (hub genes), we used Cytohuba.
We used
Metascape version v3.5.2030101
50
for enrichment
analyses and evaluation of which biomolecular pathways each group
of up- and down-regulated proteins, the possible associations of these
pathways with diseases, how these proteins possibly regulate these
mechanisms, as well as the signature by the gene expression of cells
and tissues of specific action.