Introduction
Particular combinations of glycerophospholipids
(GPs), sphingolipids
(SLs), glycerolipids (GLs), and sterols (STs) constitute the complete
lipidome that can be organized in liquid ordered and disordered domains
within membranes.
1
Raft microdomains, also
known as lipid rafts, are heterogeneous and metastable
2
liquid ordered domains with a dynamic structure
3
that are enriched in SLs and cholesterol.
4
Their main characteristic apart from their composition
is their resistance to detergent disruption.
5
These domains are present in the external part of the plasma membrane
leaflet
6
and could be found in mammalian
cell endosomes.
5
,
7
Additionally, raft-like domains
have been observed in various organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), lysosomes, or mitochondria.
8
−
10
In addition to
their existence in a variety of cell locations,
the protein compositions of raft domains can change due to exposure
to different stimuli. Examples of proteins found in these domains
are the different complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system,
11
different brain receptors, such as sigma-1 and
sigma-2, or flotillin-1, a protein enriched in raft domains and thus
considered a general raft biomarker.
12
,
13
Moreover,
acetylcholinesterase (AChE),
14
a protein
that performs the hydrolysis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine,
can be in raft due to its glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor.
15
,
16
Sigma domains are nonopioid receptor brain proteins implicated in
certain psychiatric disorders
17
that have
also been suggested to participate in neurodegenerative diseases,
such as Alzheimer disease.
18
These receptors
have been found in the mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum
membrane (MAM), specifically in detergent-resistant microdomains.
19
Changes in the organization or protein
composition of a lipid raft
can alter the membrane’s local environment and entail disturbances
over cellular functionality, which is particularly relevant in the
nervous system where altered neurotransmission or protein clustering
clearly contributes to neuropathological events.
20
,
21
High oxidative damage have been reported in pathologies such as
Alzheimer disease and closely correlates with amyloid and tau pathologies.
22
Oxidative damage produced by reactive oxygen
species is predicted to produce changes in membrane rafts in pathologic
conditions, such as lipid peroxidation
23
or raft disruption.
24
Reactive oxygen
species can be produced by different enzymes and can be triggered
by exposition to serum starvation
25
or
to a pro-oxidant agents like paraquat.
26
Therefore, as raft lipidome changes are expected in oxidative stress
conditions, the analysis of lipid fingerprints in raft domains from
different brain cell types exposed to metabolic and oxidative stress
conditions is of special interest. Nevertheless, the size of lipid
raft domains is a limiting factor for several techniques, such as
HPLC-MS analysis, which requires not only high amounts of samples
but also much time for data acquisition.
27
,
28
On the other hand, while MALDI requires less quantity, when the
sample is spotted with a standard method, requiring generally less
than 1 μL, it has the limitation that the sample deposition
is usually nonhomogeneous.
29
Cell
membrane microarray technology has been successfully applied
to the analysis of lipid fingerprint in samples from cell cultures
and tissues homogenates.
30
In this work,
we expand this technology for the analysis of printed raft domains.
Making the microarray technology compatible with lipid raft analysis
should represent a relevant improvement, allowing the analysis of
many and varied raft domain samples in the same platform, with small
amounts of sample required. For this purpose, the method of separation
of lipid rafts, generally by detergents, needs to be adapted to ensure
compatibility with the printing method, MALDI-MS, and enzymatic assays
techniques.
31
,
32
In this work, we perform and
validate a novel methodology for raft purification and raft printing
using microarray technology, maintaining the functionality and making
them compatible with MS, enzymatic, and binding assays. We apply this
new methodology to cell types and conditions relevant for neuropathology.
Experimental Section
Cell Lines and Culture Conditions
Astrocytoma 1321N1
and neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell lines were purchased from ECACC (ECACC-86030402)
and ATCC (ATCC CRL-266), respectively. Both cell lines were cultured
at 37 °C in a humidity-saturated atmosphere containing 5% CO
2
using a cell incubator (Hera Cell 150, Hareaus, Hanau, Germany).
Three different culture conditions were used: control situation and
low serum starvation with and without paraquat exposure.
Control Situation
The 1321N1 cell line was cultured
using DMEM medium 1 g/L glucose supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1%
l
-glutamine (
l
-Glut),
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). The SH-SY5Y cell line was cultured
using 1:1 DMEM:F12 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated
FBS, 1% nonessential amino acids, and 1% P/S.
Low Serum Starvation
Confluent 1321N1 cultures (around
10
5
cells/cm
2
) were switched from the control
medium to DMEM 1 g/L glucose, 0.2% charcoal-treated FBS, 1%
l
-Glut, and 1% P/S. Cells were harvested after 24 h of treatment.
Low Serum Starvation with Paraquat Treatment
Confluent
1321N1 cultures (around 10
5
cells/cm
2
) were
switched from the control medium to low serum medium with 0.5 mM paraquat.
Cells were harvested after 24 h of treatment. For simplicity, this
condition is labeled as “paraquat” in figures and legends.
Membrane Extraction for Lipid Raft Purification
For
membrane purification, around 10
6
cells were used as described.
9
,
33
Cell pellets (1321N1 or SH-SY5Y) were resuspended in 5 mL of TNE
buffer (Tris-HCl 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, EDTA 5 mM, pH 7.4) with protease
inhibitors (PrI) and were homogenized in a Potter S system (Satorius
AG, Göttingen, Germany), with 20 strokes rotating at 400 rpm.
Supernatants were collected, transferred to quick-seal 5.6 mL centrifuge
tubes (ref 363963, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), and centrifuged
at 100000
g
in an optimal 100 XP ultracentrifuge
(Beckman coulter, Brea, CA, USA, 100Ti rotor) for 75 min. Supernatants
were discarded, and membrane pellets were resuspended in 200 μL
of TNE with PrI. Protein quantity was determined using a Pierce MicroBCA
protein assay (ref 23235, ThermoFisher Sci., Waltham, MA, USA).
Detergent-Free Method for Lipid Raft Isolation
Sonication Raft Separation
Membrane preparations (300
μg of proteins) were resuspended in 2 mL of TNE with PrI. The
suspension was sonicated (Vibracell 75115, ThermoFisher Bioblock scientific
S.L, Waltham, MA, USA) 5 times with 30% amplitude using intervals
of 20 s with 1 min cooldown periods between each sonication pulse
using a TipCB33-3363658 tip (BochemLabordebarf, Weilburg, Germany).
Immediately after the sonication, each sample was mixed with 4.4 mL
of 80% sucrose prepared as described below.
Sucrose Step-Gradient Preparation
For the 80% sucrose
solution, sucrose was dissolved in TNE (by heating at 60 °C,
avoiding overheating and caramelization), and PrI were added after
cooling. Serial dilutions of the 80% solution are performed in TNE
with PI to make 35%, and 5% sucrose solutions. Sonicated membranes
(1 mL) are mixed with 80% sucrose to get a final concentration of
55% and placed at the bottom of a 12.5 mL ultracentrifuge tube (ref
344060, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). A 6 mL layer of 35% sucrose
is placed with care on top of the sample, and a final 3 mL layer of
5% sucrose is on top.
Raft Separation by Ultracentrifugation
Sucrose gradients
were centrifuged at 4 °C and 102000
g
(Beckman
coulter optimal 100 XP ultracentrifuge, SW40 rotor, Brea, CA, USA)
for 24 h. After ultracentrifugation, tubes are always kept on ice,
and the raft domains (present in the interphase between 5% and 35%
sucrose) are collected in a 1 mL fraction. To check for the presence
of raft domains, 300 μL of each fraction in the gradient was
precipitated (see below) and analyzed by Western blot assay. The rest
of the volume (700 μL) was diluted up to 5.6 mL with TNE with
PI to dilute the excess sucrose. After gentle mixing, they were ultracentrifuged
in quick-seal centrifuge tubes as described above for 2.5 h to ensure
the correct precipitation of the raft pellet. Supernatants were discarded,
and pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of TNE with PI, transferred
to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes, and centrifuged again at 4 °C (6 h,
16100
g
in 5415R microcentrifuge, Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany). After the supernatants were discarded, raft samples were
stored as pellets at −80 °C until usage.
Trichloroacetic Acid Protein Precipitation and Western Blot
Assay
For Western Blot analysis, an adaptation of the protocol
used by Corraliza-Gomez was used.
9
For
more details, see the
Supporting Information
file.
Raft Membrane Microarrays (RMMAs) Printing Method
Raft
pellets were defrosted on ice for 15 min, resuspended in printing
buffer, adjusted to a concentration of 5 mg/mL, and incubated overnight
at 4 °C. Raft preparations were printed onto preactivated glass
slides using a noncontact microarrayer with a solenoid tip (Nanoplotter
NP2.1, GeSiM Bioinstruments, and Microfluidics, Radeberg, Germany),
placing 3 replicates of each sample (3 nl/drop, 10 drops/spot). Different
concentrations of rat brain cortex whole membranes were used as the
inner control, and the printing buffer was used as the negative control.
Preactivation of the glass slides was carried out as previously described.
34
Printing was carried out under controlled humidity
(relative humidity 60%) at a controlled temperature of 4 °C.
Distance between spots was set at 950 μm. To ensure the correct
spot adherence, RMMAs were let dry at 4 °C and 60% relative humidity
for 45 min before being stored at −20 °C until usage.
Protein Quantification by Bradford Staining in RMMAs
After at least 2 days at −20 °C, Bradford staining is
performed in RMMAs to test correct membrane adherence and analyze
the protein concentration of each spot after printing. RMMAs were
defrosted inside a desiccator chamber for 1 h. Afterward, RMMAs are
completely immersed in Bradford staining (4.7% Coomassie blue, 8.5%
ortho
-phosphoric acid) at 4 °C for 1 h in darkness.
After being dipped in distilled H
2
O at room temperature,
stained RMMAs were dried out with a small fan. Color signal was acquired
with an Epson V750 pro canner (Seiko Epson Corporation, Suwa, Nagano,
Japan), and digital images were analyzed and quantified using ImageScanner
Software (IMG Pharma S.L, Zamudio, Spain). Protein total quantity
in each spot is determined using the known concentrations of rat brain
cortex spots as a standard curve.
MALDI-MS in RMMAs
To perform lipidomic analysis, RMMAs
were coated with a uniform film of approximately 0.2 mg/cm
2
with the aid of a standard glass sublimator (Ace Glass 8233, Vineland,
NJ, USA). 1,5-Diaminophtalene (DAN) and 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT)
were used for negative and positive ion-modes, respectively. The matrixes
were sublimated for 19 and 17 min, respectively. RMMAs were then scanned.
Since in MALDI imaging experiments the coverage, pixel quantity, and
resolution of each experiment depend on the spot’s diameter,
the separation between spots and the quality of the samples were analyzed.
Since each spot has a diameter of 450 μm, the array area was
explored following coordinates in a grid with 150 μm between-nodes
separation. We used an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a MALDI source
with a N
2
laser (60 Hz, 100 μJ/pulse maximum power
output). The laser spot is an ellipsoid of approximately 50–60
μm × 140–160 μm. Two microscans of 10 shots/pixel
were used, with laser power outputs of 30 and 20 μJ for MS–
and MS+, respectively, and a resolution of 150 μm. Data loading
included spectra normalization by total ion current (TIC), spectra
alignment, and peak picking, filtering all the
m
/
z
values with intensity <0.5% of the strongest peak in
the spectrum. Lipid
m
/
z
values and
their annotations are listed in
Table S1
.
Mitochondrial Electron Transport Chain Enzymatic Activities
To measure the activities of different complexes of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain, the following assays were performed.
NADH-Oxidoreductase Activity Assay
RMMAs were placed
in a desiccator for 30 min to ensure correct defrosting, and the area
of each microarray was delimited with a hydrophobic barrier pen. RMMAs
were incubated with a reaction solution (0.35 mM NADH, 0.1 mg/mL NBT,
50 μM decylubiquinone (dUQ), phosphate buffer (PB) 10 mM, pH
7.4) with and without sodium azide (10 mM) inside a humidity chamber
at a controlled temperature of 24 °C for 4 h. The reaction was
stopped by removing the reaction solution, gently washing the RMMAs
in distilled water, and drying them at room temperature with a small
fan.
Gliceraldehydo-3-phosphate Dehydrogenase Activity Assay
RMMAs were correctly defrosted, and the microarray area was delimited
as indicated above. RMMAs were incubated with a reaction solution
(20 mM glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, 0.1 mg/mL NBT, 50 μM dUQ,
cytochrome c 0.01%, PB 10 mM, pH 7.4). The reaction was stopped as
described above.
Cholinesterase Activity Assay
To study the cholinesterase,
acetylcholinesterase, and butirylcholinesterase activities, the following
protocols were performed.
Total Cholinesterase Activity Assay
RMMAs prepared
as above were washed twice using Tris-maleate buffer (0.1 M Tris-maleate,
pH 6). RMMAs were incubated with a reaction solution (65 mM Tris-maleate
pH 6, 5 mM sodium citrate, 3 mM copper sulfate, and 5 mM potassium
ferricyanide with and without 0.74 mg/mL acetylcholine iodide). The
reaction mixture was incubated for 16 h in humidity chamber in darkness.
The reaction was stopped by cautiously removing the reaction solution
and washing twice with Tris-maleate buffer for 10 min. RMMAs were
then dipped into distilled water and dried as explained above.
Butirylcholinesterase Activity Assay
RMMAs prepared
as described above were washed twice using Tris-maleate buffer and
incubated with the same reaction solution as in total cholinesterase
assay but with BW284 (1 mM) added as a selective inhibitor for acetylcholinesterase
activity. After 16 h incubation in a humidity chamber in darkness,
the reaction was stopped and the RMMAs were dried as explained above.
To obtain the acetylcholinesterase activity, the difference between
the butirylcholinesterase and total cholinesterase activities was
calculated.
Sigma-1 Receptor Ligand-Binding Assay in RMMAs
To analyze
whether the RMMAs are suitable for binding assays, sigma-1 and sigma-2
receptor binding assays were performed. First, RMMAs were defrosted
for 60 min at room temperature inside a desiccator chamber. A preincubation
was performed in washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mg/mL bovine
serum albumin (BSA), 1% sodium deoxycolate) at 24 °C inside a
water bath for 60 min. RMMAs were then incubated for 150 min at 37
°C inside a water bath with washing buffer with sigma receptor
fluorescent ligand CELT-483 (50 nM) in the presence or absence of
haloperidol (10 μM), as a receptor antagonist, or L6 as a selective
sigma-1 masking agent. Later RMMAs were washed gently in distilled
water at 4 °C and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at
room temperature. The fixed microarrays were washed with PBS-TTD (PBS,
0.5% Tween-20, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate) and dried
with a cold air current at 4 °C in darkness. Signal acquisition
was performed using a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System with red illumination
and a 695/55 filter. Images obtained were analyzed and quantified
using Image Lab software (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Statistical Analysis of MS Data
Statistical analysis
was performed using Graphpad Prism Software from Dotmatics (Boston,
Massachussets, USA). α was set to 0.05 in all tests.
Outlier Detection
For possible outlier spectrum detection,
a two-tailed Pearson correlation test was performed for each ionization
mode separately. A correlation of less than 0.7 between replicates
is considered as an outlier value and discarded.
Monovariable Analysis
To test the normality of each
variable, a Saphiro–Wilk normality test was performed. To elucidate
if there was any statistically significant difference in lipid relative
abundance between the different spectra obtained, the Mann–Whitney
rank nonparametric test was performed for every comparison.
Pixel Cluster
Segmentation of the pixels in the array
image was done using a modified version of the segmentation algorithm
RankCompete based on the properties of Markov chains
35
to define random walkers
36
,
37
competing
to divide the imaging experiment into two segments. However, by definition,
the RankCompete algorithm divides the experiment into two segments,
and our array data may contain a variable number of segments. Therefore,
we used a variation of the Divisive Analysis algorithm (DIANA) to
create a variable number of walkers. Thus, the final software is a
segmentation algorithm based on DIANA and uses RankCompete as a split
function. Once the segments were obtained, correlations between them
were calculated, and the value was used to assign a color to each
segment using a color scale and 1-correlation between the segments.
In this way, the two segments that present the lowest correlation
occupy the two extremes of the scale, and those segments with more
similar average spectra receive colors that are closer to each other
in the scale.
Multivariable Analysis
Different methods were used
for analysis and classification, divided into unsupervised and supervised
methods. For the principal component analysis, normalized data were
used, whereas for the other methods data sets with a reduced number
of variables after principal components analysis were used instead.
Principal Component Analysis
Principle component analysis
is a suitable method to describe the behavior of the samples. To reduce
the number of samples, we selected the 50 best-ranked variables using
the ANOVA test. Afterward, the number of principal components (PC)
that can explain more than 90% of the variability were selected, with
a % variability explained larger than 0.5% in each additional PC.
K-Nearest Neighbors’ Classification Method
The
K-nearest neighbors classification method is a supervised method in
which each data point is classified to the class that is most prevalent
out of the closest points. The K number of neighbors was set to 5
using The Euclidean distance and uniform weight.
Naïve Bayes
Naïve Bayes is a supervised
method based on the conditional probability theorem of Bayes.
Random Forest
The random forest supervised classificatory
method was based on decision trees. The number of decision trees was
set to 10, and subsets with less than 5 features do not split into
new decision trees.
Neural Networks
The neural network method is a supervised
method composed of different layers of “neurons”. The
number of neurons per hidden layer was set at 200, with a maximum
of 350 iterations. The activation function used was a rectified linear
unit function (ReLu;
eq
1
).
1
The solver for the weight optimization
used was a stochastic gradient descent.
For all the supervised
methods, the validation was performed using
cross-validation of 10-fold. All the analyses were performed using
Orange
38
open software tools from the University
of Ljubljana (Ljubljana, Slovenia).
Signal Acquisition for Enzymatic Assays, Data Processing, And
Statistical Analysis
For all the activity assays, the color
signal was acquired with an Epson V750 pro-scanner, and digital images
were analyzed and quantified using the software ImageScanner (IMG
Pharm Biotech S.L, Spain). Data obtained were normalized with respect
to the total protein quantity obtained by Bradford assay in the RMMA.
Data handling and analysis were carried out using Excel and Graphpad
software (version 9.2). The identification of outliers was carried
out using the following equations (
eq
2
and
3
):
2
3
where DF is the deviation factor, SD is the
standard deviation, and
X̅
is the mean
Points lower than
Y
1
or higher than
Y
2
were identified as outliers. For the analysis,
a deviation factor of 1.25 was used, and data were expressed as means
of independent data points ± SD. The results were analyzed using
one-way two-tailed ANOVA with Tukey’s posthoc test, and α
was set as 0.05.
Results
Lipid Raft Preparation
Western blot assay was performed
in all of the fractions obtained after the step-gradient ultracentrifugation
in order to check the correct separation of the membrane subdomains.
Only fraction 3, positive for Lamp2, Flotillin1, Apolipoprotein, and
Caveolin1,
10
was chosen as the lipid raft-enriched fraction
and was used for printing RMMAs in every condition and cell type.
Nonraft membranes remain at the bottom of the gradient and are characterized
by high presence of Lamp2 and only minor traces of the other three
markers (
Figure
1
).
Figure 1
Western
blot assay with markers for both raft and nonraft membrane
subdomains. Example for raft preparation of 1321N1 cells in a control
situation. Note that part of the strong ApoD signal was still present
after stripping and is visible above the Cav1 signal.
The protein content was quantified for each sample,
and the pellets
were resuspended in printing buffer to reach a concentration of 5
mg/mL of protein.
Lipid Profiling
To demonstrate the capabilities of
this methodology, microarrays containing lipid raft domains from human
neuronal (control situation) and astrocytic cell lines (control situation
and low serum starvation with or without paraquat exposure) were developed.
Along with the lipid raft samples, the microarray also included membranes
of rat brain cortex at 6 different concentrations as a quantitative
standard curve. A line containing the printing solution was included
as blank (
Figure
2
A).
Each microarray spot contains 30 nL of a 5 mg/mL sample solution or
different known concentrations for the rat brain cortex standards.
Figure 2
Lipid
fingerprint analysis in RMMAs from astrocytic and neuronal
cell lines using mass spectrometry in MS–. (A) Printing design
for microarrays. Standard curves and samples were printed in triplicate.
(B) Example images showing the relative abundance of selected lipids
in raft samples or standards using gray scale. (C) Segmentation analysis
using our modified RankCompete algorithm. Colors were assigned by
using the rainbow color scale.
Following the procedure described in the “
MALDI-MS in RMMAs
” section, between 9 and
25 spectra
(one per pixel) are obtained for each spot of the microarray. In order
to get the average spectrum of each spot, a divisive hierarchical
clustering is performed to segment the spectra in the spot (
R
> 0.9 between all the spectra in each segment), the
more
intense of which is identified and assigned as the average spectra
of the sample (30). Those lipid average spectra were normalized to
their total ion current (
Figure S3
) to
compare the fingerprint changes over both cell lines and conditions.
Immobilized lipid raft preparation showed clear source-dependent differences
in the intensity of the different lipids analyzed by MALDI imaging,
while no differences were observed between the replicates of a given
sample. Our method is able to detect different distributions of certain
lipids along the different cell types or conditions (
Figures
2
B and
S1
).
Spectra obtained in the MS– mode revealed
that lipid raft
preparations from the neuronal cell line are clearly different from
those of astrocytes.
Figure
2
B shows how the peak at 885.5499 ([PI 38:4 – H]
−
) reached higher relative intensity than other selected
lipids only in neuronal rafts. The peak that corresponds to [LPI 18:0
– H]
−
presented a higher relative intensity
in rafts from astrocytic samples exposed to paraquat, whereas [PE
36:1 – H]
−
(
m
/
z
= 744.5549) showed a similar relative intensity in all astrocytic
samples regardless of treatment. As another example, [SM 34:2;O2–
CH
3
]
−
was present only in rafts from
astrocytic samples and displayed a relative increase in intensity
with both treatments. Surprisingly, this lipid exhibited a very low
relative intensity in neuronal rafts and was absent in rat brain cortex
membranes (
Figure
2
B). To test for intraexperiment reproducibility, hierarchical clustering
with the HDC-RC segmentation algorithm was performed directly over
the TIC-normalized data. Pixels with the same color have more similarity
between their spectra than those with different colors. In this sense,
replicates of each raft sample presented similar colors, which can
be an indicative of good intraexperimental reproducibility (
Figure
2
C). Along with this
analysis, lipid raft samples from both cell lines in different conditions
presented different spectra, which make them distinguishable by their
lipid fingerprint (
Figure
2
C). In general, more homogeneous results have been obtained
in our cluster analysis from negative ion mode than from positive
ion mode (compare
Figure
2
C with
Figure S1C
).
To answer
the question of whether we can distinguish lipid rafts
from different cell types or experimental conditions using their lipid
fingerprints, we performed PCA and classification methods. The 50
best-ranked annotated lipids were used for PCA to compare rafts from
both cell lines in the control situation (
Figures
3
A and
S2A
) and
the astrocytic raft domains in control vs metabolic stress (
Figures
3
B and
S2B
) or in metabolic vs oxidative stress situations
(
Figures
3
C and
S2C
). The selected lipids from MS– spectra
were enough to ensure a complete separation between raft samples just
in the first component when comparing neuronal with astrocytic rafts
(
Figure
3
A) or the
effect of oxidative stress in astrocytes (
Figure
3
C), and almost complete separation was caused
by only metabolic stress (
Figure
3
B). With data obtained from MS+ spectra, the first
principal component can separate groups in all comparisons (
Figure S2
).
Figure 3
Principal component analysis (PCA) of
lipid raft samples from neuronal
and astrocytic cell lines under different conditions using MS–
data. (A) PCA of astrocytic and neuronal rafts in control situations
(92% variability explained by the first 2 principal components PC1
and PC2). (B) PCA of astrocytic rafts in metabolic stress and control
situation (90% variance explained by 4 principal components PC1–PC4).
(C) PCA of astrocytic rafts in metabolic and oxidative stress (98%
variability explained by PC1 and PC2).
In order to check if this lipid fingerprint can
lead into a useful
sample classification, different algorithms were used (kNN, neural
network, Naïve Bayes and random forest), as explained in the
Experimental Section
. To this aim, we have performed
the analysis with the whole lipid fingerprint and with the 50 best-ranked
annotated lipids that presented higher differences among the conditions
analyzed. In both cases when comparing metabolic stress with the control
situation and oxidative stress against metabolic stress conditions,
higher accuracy was obtained with the 50 best-ranked lipid analysis
(
Tables S2 and S3
).
Treatment and Cell Line Influence over the Lipidome of Printed
Lipid Raft Domains
Metabolic and oxidative stress conditions
can be responsible for lipidome changes due to the presence of reactive
oxygen species (
Figure
4
A). We have detected [PA O-36:3 – H]
−
in
astrocytic lipid rafts in both low serum conditions (with or without
paraquat), showing a higher relative intensity in the last one. The
opposite behavior was observed in [PS 36:1 – H]
−
and [PS 34:1 – H]
−
, which displayed a higher
relative intensity in astrocytic rafts under paraquat conditions and
were barely present or even absent in neurons under control conditions.
Similarly [PI 36:1 – H]
−
was also highly
present in paraquat conditions with low detection in the control or
metabolic stress conditions (
Figure
4
A). In positive ion mode, differences in the relative
abundance of [PC 34:1 + Cs]
+
and [PC 35:2 + Cs]
+
were found between conditions in astrocytic raft membranes, with
higher relative intensity in the metabolic stress situation for [PC
35:2 + Cs]
+
(
Figure S1B
). When
studying differences between both cell lines in control situations
(
Figure
4
B), [PE 40:4
– H]
−
was, for example, only detected in
rafts from the neuronal cell line, whereas [SM 32:1;O2 – CH
3
]
−
showed a higher relative intensity in
rafts from astrocytes in every condition tested and was absent in
neuronal rafts. The same behavior was detected in positive-ion mode
for [LPC 16:0 + Cs]
+
(
Figure S1B
).
Figure 4
Relative abundance of selected example lipids in printed raft samples
using the gray scale. Shown on the left is the design for the standard
curve and samples, printed in triplicate. (A) Relative abundance of
selected lipids that presented differences due to the treatment. (B)
Relative abundance of selected lipids that presented differences between
both cell lines in the control situation. No signal over the set threshold
(0.1% of higher peak relative intensity) was detected in the rat cortex
controls for these lipids.
Analysis of Enzymatic Activities in Printed Raft Domains
Different enzymatic activities were analyzed in order to test the
functionality of printed raft membranes. Lipid rafts contain a wide
variety of integral and peripheral proteins that can be modified upon
reaction to different stimuli such as the presence of metabolic or
oxidative stress conditions. Moreover, it has been observed that different
complexes of the oxidative phosphorylation system may exist in raft
domains.
11
To check these activities, a
colorimetric assay was performed using NADH as the complex I substrate
in the presence or absence of sodium azide, a selective inhibitor
of complex IV (
Figure
5
A).
Figure 5
Enzymatic activity of selected enzymes in printed raft domains.
(A) NADH oxidoreductase enzymatic activity in the presence or absence
of a selective mitochondrial complex IV inhibitor. (B) Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase activity. (C) Total cholinesterase, butyrilcholinesterase,
and acetylcholinesterase activity assay. Two-way ANOVA two-tailed
test was performed in panels A and C. One-way ANOVA two-tailed test
was used in panel B. In all cases, α was set at 0.05. Obtained
p
-values are shown in graphs. Data are expressed as mean
± SD.
No differences were observed due to the presence
of sodium azide
under all conditions. Nevertheless, differences were observed in superoxide
formation between the raft from astrocytes in low serum and control
situations, which reached 429 ± 7 and 88 ± 15 O.D/ng immobilized
protein, respectively (
p-
value <0.0001). The same
tendency was observed between rafts from low serum starved astrocytes
with and without paraquat, the last one achieving 153 ± 53 O.D/ng
immobilized protein (
p-
value <0.0001) (
Figure
5
A). Moving forward
to other enzymatic activities, GAPDH catalyzes the conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
to 1,3-biphosphoglycerate, an intermediate from the Krebs cycle, and
is a key enzyme in the glycolytic pathway. It has been reported not
only in the cytosolic fraction but also in membranes, either in rafts
and nonraft domains.
39
Significant differences
were observed between rafts from neuronal (246 ± 1 O.D/ng immobilized
protein) and astrocytic (26 ± 3 O.D/ng immobilized protein) cells
in the control situation (
p-
value <0.0001). A
slightly increasing tendency was observed due to oxidative stress
when comparing raft domains from low serum starved astrocytes in the
presence (60 ± 33 O.D/ng immobilized protein and absence (66
± 5 O.D/ng immobilized protein) of paraquat exposure (
Figure
5
B).
Finally,
we tested the activity of the ChE enzyme family that catalyzes
the hydrolysis of choline esters. In particular, AChE catalyzes the
hydrolysis of acetylcholine, while BuChE does so for butyrylcholine.
40
In raft printed domains from neurons, ChE activity
reached 247 ± 77 O.D/ng immobilized protein in comparison with
437 ± 86 O.D/ng immobilized protein determined in astrocytic
rafts (
p
-value of 0.0274). Metabolic stress in astrocytes
did not result in differences from the control situation, yielding
414 ± 99 O.D/ng immobilized protein. By contrast, the oxidative
stress situation triggered by paraquat treatment resulted in increased
activity in astrocytic rafts (613 ± 249 OD/ng immobilized protein)
(
p-
value 0.0194). On the other side, BuChE activity,
measured by using the BW284 AChE inhibitor, revealed that neuron printed
rafts displayed about half the activity detected in printed rafts
of control astrocytes, with 73 ± 3 and 165 ± 19 O.D/ng immobilized
protein respectively. Control astrocytes also doubled the value of
rafts for low serum starved cells in not only the absence but also
the presence of paraquat, yielding in this case 78 ± 35 and 80
± 32 O.D/ng immobilized protein, respectively. Regarding AChE
activity, neuronal printed rafts received a color signal of 158 ±
64 O.D/ng immobilized protein and presented a lower activity than
astrocytic rafts (256 ± 97 O.D/ng immobilized protein). No differences
were observed between these control rafts and low serum starvation
ones (307 ± 86 O.D/ng immobilized protein). However, a higher
activity of AChE was obtained in paraquat-treated rafts (533 ±
249 O.D/ng immobilized protein), as happened with the total ChE activity
(
Figure
5
C) (
p-
value 0.008).
Performing Ligand-Binding Assays in Printed RMMAs: Sigma Receptors
If our printed raft domains maintain their native structure, we
predicted that not only enzymes but also other membrane proteins should
keep their biological function. We then characterized ligand binding
to sigma-1 and sigma-2 receptors for their interest in neurodegenerative
diseases. They are associated with AD
41
and frontotemporal dementia and are considered targets for AD therapeutics.
42
Our analysis of sigma receptors showed no statistical
differences between conditions or cell types but instead a tendency
toward less total ligand-binding to sigma-1 and sigma-2 receptors
in neurons compared to astrocytes in the control situation (
Figure
6
A; 7727 ± 1864
and 11232 ± 3207 O.D/ng immobilized protein, respectively). Also,
a tendency to decrease binding to astrocytic rafts upon stress conditions
was observed (low-serum: 10353 ± 3389 O.D/ng immobilized protein;
low-serum + paraquat: 7749 ± 2270 O.D/ng immobilized protein)
(
Figure
6
A).
Figure 6
Fluorescent
ligand binding assay for sigma-1 and sigma-2 receptors
in printed lipid raft domains in different conditions. (A) Density
of active total sigma-1 and sigma-2 receptors. (B) Density of sigma-2
receptors using a sigma-1 masking agent. (C) Density of sigma-1 receptors
calculated as de difference between panels A and B. One-way ANOVA
two-tailed wtest ith Tukey’s posthoc was carried out with α
set at 0.05, obtained
p-
values are shown in graphs.
Data are expressed as mean ± SD.
By using a sigma-1 masking agent, we analyzed sigma-2
receptor
binding=. In this regard, binding activity presented differences between
neuronal (3558 ± 953 O.D/ng immobilized protein) and astrocytic
(7825 ± 549 O.D/ng immobilized protein) rafts in the control
situation (
p-
value 0.003). Moreover, treatments in
astrocytes also resulted in statistically significant differences
between metabolic (6857 ± 950 O.D/ng immobilized protein) and
oxidative (4617 ± 1815 O.D/ng immobilized protein) stress conditions
(
Figure
6
B) (
p-
value of 0.0267). Finally, we evaluated the binding to
sigma-1 receptors and obtained differences between cell types but
not with conditions in astrocytes (
Figure
6
C). As expected from the behavior of sigma-2
receptor binding, our calculated sigma-1 binding has an opposite behavior
to that obtained for total sigma receptor binding (5460 ± 1014
in neuronal rafts O.D/ng immobilized protein; 2295 ± 1890 O.D/ng
immobilized protein in astrocytic rafts) (
p-
value
0.0582), whereas no differences are found for astrocytic rafts in
different conditions (2320 ± 1997 O.D/ng immobilized protein
in low serum starved rafts in the absence of paraquat and 2424 ±
2067 O.D/ng immobilized protein in its presence).
Discussion
The present study develops a new methodology
that allows for the
simultaneous analysis of lipid composition, enzymatic activity, and
receptor binding in raft domains isolated from neurons and astrocytes
subjected to different stress conditions and immobilized in microarrays.
To maintain the functionality of lipid raft proteins and make the
isolation compatible with microarray printing, lipid raft isolation
had to be optimized. It was first performed using two different detergents
(TX-100 and TX-114) by incubating the cell suspension in buffer with
the detergent at a final concentration of 1%. After raft separation
in the sucrose gradient, a dialysis method was used to clean both
the detergent and sucrose, which might affect the immobilization of
the sample. Neither of these methods resulted in preparations that
could be stably immobilized by our membrane-printing method. We therefore
switched to a detergent-free method, followed by centrifugation steps
to remove sucrose and reconstitute raft preparations in the printing
buffer. Our results demonstrate the strength of this methodology in
lipid fingerprint determination, cell type identification, and analysis
of lipid and protein changes associated with exposure to metabolic
or oxidative stress in raft microdomains.
To this aim, MALDI-MS
experiments were performed by taking 20 laser
shots/pixel, with 16 pixels per spot analyzed. Compared with MALDI-MS
performed in individual samples, with this technology the time was
significantly reduced, with a signal acquisition time of only 80 min
per RMMA. With regard to lipid profiling, the results present a distinguishable
lipid signature for raft subdomains not only between the different
conditions (control, low serum starvation, and paraquat exposure)
but also between different tissues (cell lines vs rat cortex homogenates)
30
and even rafts from different brain cells (astrocytes
vs neurons). As a relevant example, our data analysis revealed that
[SM 34:2 – CH
3
]
−
and [LPC 16:0
+ Cs]
+
are relatively enriched in astrocytic raft domains
in every condition but is absent in neuronal rafts and in rat cortex
(
Figures
4
B and
S1B
). This finding suggests that these lipids
are present only in raft domains from human astrocytes, as the rat
cortex internal control should contain both astrocytes and neurons.
If that is the case, these species could be lipid biomarkers for the
human astrocytic raft domains. Following the same reasoning, [PE 40:4
– H]
−
could be a neuronal raft biomarker,
as it is only detected in this domain (
Figure
3
B). In addition, various l+ipid variables
were able to discriminate oxidative stress from metabolic stress and
the last one from the control situation. As an example, [PA O-36:3
– H]
−
, observed only in metabolic and stressed
situations, could be plasmalogen, which is related to protective functions
against oxidative stress.
43
One of the
detected lipids, [PI 38:4 – H]
−
, with a higher
presence in lipid rafts from the neuronal cell line compared to astrocytes
(
Figure
2
B), is also
found in white matter in human samples and is known to be downregulated
in Alzheimer disease patients.
44
In addition,
[PE 36:1 – H]
−
, which is slightly increased
in neuronal rafts (
Figure
2
B), has been described as a risk indicator for diabetes and
was also found to be increased in HIV patients compared with the control
situation.
45
Therefore, the RMMA technology
used to print raft domains provides a useful platform for comparative
analysis of lipid signatures in a reasonable short time in order to
determinate the potential effect over the lipidome of many toxic compounds
such as paraquat or any treatment or disease where changes in lipid
raft composition might be key to their understanding.
The maintenance
of functionality of the lipid rafts printed in
our RMMAs has been demonstrated thanks to the different enzymatic
activity assays (NADH dehydrogenase, GAPDH, cholinesterase, acetylcholinesterase,
and butyrilcholinesterase). Differences triggered by treatment in
astrocytic rafts have been found in all enzymatic activities except
in butyrilcholinesterase. In this sense, cholinesterase activity is
known to be increased in activated astrocytes,
46
explaining the differences between neuronal and astrocytic
rafts. The differences between conditions in astrocytic raft domains
can be produced by the recruitment and exclusion of proteins to and
from the raft subdomains upon different stimuli. Therefore, the observed
differences may indicate the existence of raft protein remodeling
processes due to stress conditions or an alteration of the astrocyte
functionality due to oxidative stress conditions.
47
Revealing this fact is useful particularly for understanding
AChE modulation due to its close relation with Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD).
14
Thus, our work opens the
door to tests for a variety of treatments, such as anticholinesterase
modulators or inhibitors, one of the main approaches for Alzheimer’s
disease treatment. GAPDH is considered a housekeeping protein that
has a great interest in several diseases such as AD
48
or cancer.
49
GAPDH showed a
tendency toward increased activity in our printed raft domains due
to paraquat treatment. Interestingly, paraquat treatment, seems to
have an opposite effect at 48 h after treatment.
50
Nevertheless, it has been reported that GAPDH increased
activity or overexpression provides protection against apoptotic conditions.
51
NADH is used as a substrate by different
enzymes, including mitochondrial
complex I, but not restricted to it. Thus, our results suggest that
this component of the mitochondrial chain might be located in raft-like
membrane subdomains.
52
Also, it is important
to notice that, as the signal in our enzymatic assays is normalized
to the total protein present in each spot, the differences detected
cannot be due to higher protein concentration in raft domains. It
will be worth investigating if they are due to the lipid environment
influences on enzyme activity.
The RMMA methodology has also
proved to be useful for receptor
binding assays. We have tested sigma-1 and sigma-2 binding and found
higher receptor density in rafts from astrocytes compared to neurons,
with a decreasing tendency in metabolic and oxidative stress conditions.
Using a sigma-1 masking agent (see material and methods section) we
can detect that statistically significant differences were present
between metabolically and oxidative stressed raft domains (
Figure
6
C). No differences
were observed between conditions for sigma-1 receptor binding in astrocytic
rafts. Curiously, sigma-2 receptors have been found in brain regions
and are closely associated with lipid metabolism, amyloid-β
oligomer blocking, synaptoprotection, and regulation of cholesterol
homeostasis among other functions.
53
Thus,
the aberrant activity of processes that are sigma-2-mediated can be
triggered by oxidative stress. Nevertheless, this pathological process
can also alter the membrane composition and promote their exclusion
from rafts. Last but not least, the potential of this methodology
is not limited to these techniques but also to immunoassays, proteomic
analysis, or drug screening analysis.
Conclusion
We present here an improved microarray methodology
to analyze the
lipidome, protein enzymatic activity, and receptor density in raft
membrane domains immobilized in microarrays. As a summary, this technology
allows the performance of several techniques, with special attention
to the MALDI-MS protocol in raft domains using smaller sample amounts
and less time than standard mass spectrometry techniques. Furthermore,
RMMA technology allows the possibility of performing several techniques
in a variety of tissues and samples, using the same initial samples,
and analyzing covariance between outcomes that might reveal interesting
physiological processes.