1
Introduction
Spatial omics preserves
spatial information when evaluating the
molecular composition of a specimen, allowing data to be mapped to
specific regions, including tissues, single cells, and subcellular
regions. Spatial omics helps us better understand cellular organization
and interactions in histological landscapes. It can detect molecular
parameters in situ, on intact tissue samples having differential transcript
or protein abundance within their native spatial context, and it can
delineate the interactions between molecular parameters, leveraging
different multiplexed labeling methods. Recently reported spatial
omics approaches permit in situ spatial profiling of several distinct
types of molecular information, including RNA, protein, metabolite,
and epigenetic targets. Spatial multiomics methods that simultaneously
capture different types of molecular information are now commercially
available. Spatial omics applications are increasingly used to answer
biological questions in fields ranging from cancer research (especially
tumor microenvironment questions) to neuroscience and organismal development.
1
−
4
Advances in spatial omics have relied heavily on nanotechnology,
since methods that use the intrinsic properties of nanomaterials in
nanodevices and nanobiotechnological tools have enabled precise cellular
and subcellular labeling and sequencing. As a result, spatial omics
methods can now define structure/function down to almost 1 nm versus
the 1 μm limit of traditional light microscopy. Methods and
techniques adopted from the field of nanotechnology have allowed insight
into biological systems at nanoscale resolution, enabling analyses
that were not feasible before the use of such nanotechnological approaches.
Spatial omics methods have been reviewed elsewhere,
1
−
3
,
5
,
6
but
few of these articles have focused on the role of nanotechnology in
these methods, and described its use in specific applications rather
than providing a comprehensive overview of potential applications.
For example, one such review described the development and use of
nanotechnology tools for the enrichment and omics analysis of circulating
cancer cells, highlighting key advances in multiomics liquid biopsy
approaches,
7
while another discussed the
use of nanodevice DNA-barcoded fluorescence microscopy for spatial
genomics and transcriptomics.
8
In
contrast, this review provides a comprehensive review of the
use of nanotechnology in spatial omics, discussing the power and limitations
of nanotechnology as applied in recent spatial omics approaches. We
first introduce nanotechnology areas relevant to spatial omics applications,
including integrated applications of nanomaterials and nanodevices
and nanobiotechnology approaches, and highlight key nanotechnologies
that have been instrumental in developing spatial omics methods. We
then summarize spatial omics methods used to evaluate the global expression
of mRNA (spatial transcriptomics), protein (spatial proteomics), metabolites
(spatial metabolomics), and epigenetic DNA modifications (spatial
epigenomics), and then discuss current multiomics applications (spatial
multiomics). Selecting examples from the numerous spatial omics tools,
we focus on the advances underscored by nanotechnology (
Table
1
). We also summarize the critical
role of AI and machine learning in spatial omics data processing and
the integration of nanotechnology with AI, which has revolutionized
spatial biomarker discovery. Finally, we offer a perspective on the
remaining challenges and future opportunities regarding nanotechnology
for spatial omics applications.
Table 1
Current Spatial Omics Methods Applied
with Nanotechnology
Method
Nanotechnology
Advantage
Weakness
Applications
Spatial
Resolution
References
Spatial Transcriptomics
EEL FISH
ITO capture surface; DNA barcoding
continuous capture surface; high spatial resolution
lower sensitivity
Sagittal mouse brain sections
200 nm
(
63
)
Stereoseq
DNA nanoball-patterned arrays
large field of view;
high sensitivity; high spatial resolution
RNA capture
limitation; low efficiency
mouse organogenesis spatiotemporal
transcriptomic atlas
500 nm
(
86
)
scStereo-seq
DNA nanoball-array
single-cell
RNA-seq data (∼10-fold greater than Slide-seq)
not applied to tissues
Arabidopsis
leaves
single-cell resolution (∼30 μm)
(
88
)
BARseq
DNA nanoball amplicon;
fluorescence labeling; multichannel
fluorescence confocal microscopy
multiplexed projection
mapping
low spatial resolution; problems for long axons
mouse neuronal projections
cellular resolution (∼150 μm)
(
91
)
BaristaSeq
DNA nanoball amplicon; fluorescence labeling; confocal microscopy
imaging
amplification efficiency
limited
quantity, limited field of view; low spatial resolution,
limited to cell culture
BHK cells in culture
cellular resolution (∼150 μm)
(
67
)
FISSEQ
DNA nanoball amplicon; fluorescent probes; confocal
microscopy
imaging
high spatial resolution; 3D visualization
low detection; time-consuming protocol; low sensitivity, limited
field of view
human primary fibroblasts
600 nm
(
56
)
STAPmap
DNA nanoball
amplicon; in situ amplification of a library of
cDNA probes
high spatial resolution, 3D visualization
limited in hydrogel-tissue chemistry; limited quantity; limited
field of view
mouse cortex from 3D tissue blocks
Subcellular resolution (∼100 nm)
(
57
)
Slide-seq
DNA-barcoded beads; confocal microscopy imaging
scalability to large tissue volumes
costly; low
transcript detection sensitivity; low spatial resolution
dendritically localized mRNAs of mouse hippocampal neurons
10 μm
(
83
)
Slide-seqV2
spatially index barcoded bead arrays
better capture
efficiency
low spatial resolution
mouse
neocortex
10 μm
(
82
)
Seq-Scope
barcode molecule; HDMI-array
speed; straightforward protocol; precise; easy-to-implement;
excellent transcriptome capture output; high spatial resolution
limited to capture of the poly-A-tagged transcriptome
portal-central (liver), crypt-surface (colon), and inflammation-fibrosis
(injured liver) axes
600 nm
(
101
)
Spatial Proteomics
LCM
LCM
microscopy
high resolution; high yield, and multiplex
capability
time-consuming
entomology,
agriculture research, embryology, metabolic disease,
heart disease, neurobiology, infectious disease, and cancer
Subcellular resolution (∼100 nm)
(
107
)
MIBI
metal-labeled antibodies; time-of-flight secondary
ion mass
spectrometry; Au liquid metal ion gun
high spatial resolution
low protein detection efficiency
tumor microenvironment
200–300 nM
(
138
)
CODEX
DNA barcode antibodies; the microfluidics system; fluorescent
probe; fluorescence imaging microscope
high spatial
resolution; single section and staining; low cost;
suitable with common microscope
low protein detection
efficiency; requires special reagents
and equipment
normal and lupus (MRL/lpr) murine spleens
260 nm
(
124
)
Spatial
Metabolomics
MALDI
crystallized matrix;
mass spectrometry imaging
high mass resolution; suitable
for examining small samples;
reliable results
low spatial resolution; required special
preparation steps;
vacuum condition
cilia and oral groove in
Paramecium
caudatum
; cancer metabolomics; plant metabolites in situ
1.4 μm
(
138
,
74
,
221
,
167
)
DESI
nanospray; ionization
probe; mass spectrometry imaging
high throughput; ambient
operating conditions; no need extra
sample preparations; rapid results
low spatial resolution;
low sensitivity
cancer metabolomics
10–20 μm
(
133
,
221
)
SIMS
ionization beam; mass
spectrometry imaging; metal nanofilm
coating
increased spatial resolution; 3D spatial resolution
lower coverage; sensitivity
single-cell tissues
50 nm
(
58
)
Spatial
Epigenomics
Spatial-ATAC-seq
microfluidic
deterministic barcoding
ability to capture spatial epigenetic
information on tissue
low spatial resolution; data interpretation
mouse embryos
20 μm
(
156
)
Spatial-CUT&Tag
in-tissue microfluidic deterministic
barcoding
achieve spatial histone modification profiling
low spatial resolution, limited mapping area
the brain of embryonic day 11 (E11) mouse embryos
20 μm
(
175
)
Spatial Multiomics
NanoString GeoMx DSP
RNA probes, DSP probes;
photocleavable DNA tags for oligo detections
high numbers
of biomarkers with higher throughput; high RNA
detection efficiency
low protein detection efficiency;
require manual choice of
regions; low spatial resolution
whole tissue sections,
FFPE; fresh tissue; fresh-frozen tissue
10–600 μm
(
177
,
178
)
DBiT-seq
PDMS microfluidic
chip with DNA barcode; ADTs, optical or fluorescence
microscope imaging
in-tissue barcoding approach
low spatial resolution; low protein detection efficiency
mouse embryos
10 μm
(
54
)
spatial-CITE-seq
PDMS microfluidic chip with DNA barcode;
ADTs; optical or fluorescence
microscope imaging
coindexing of transcriptomes and
epitopes
low spatial resolution; better protein detection
efficiency;
poor detection efficiency for low copy number transcripts
whole mouse and human tissue types
cellular resolution (∼150 μm)
(
181
)
MOSAICA
DNA probes; fluorescent probe; confocal microscope imaging
3D visualization; high spatial resolution; low cost
limited detection efficiency and accuracy
embryonic,
juvenile mouse brain, adult human brain
100 nm
(
55
)
2
Fundamentals of Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology
is an interdisciplinary field involving the design,
synthesis, characterization, and application of materials, devices,
and systems at the nanometer scale (approximately 1 to 100 nm).
3
This nanometer scale has implications for various
fields including materials science, electronics, energy, environmental
science, engineering, and medicine.
9
Its
broad-spanning implications are attributed to the physical, chemical,
and biological properties that emerge following control of nanostructure
parameters such as shape and size.
10
,
11
These properties,
distinct from properties of the same materials at the microscopic
or macroscopic scale, are not evident without nanotechnology’s
larger surface area-to-volume ratios and quantum effects.
9
,
12
−
14
Nanotechnology includes synthetic and natural nanostructures
and encompasses both bottom-up assembly and top-down fabrication techniques.
15
−
18
For example, three different elements combine to make indium tin
oxide, and though its bulk form is yellowish/gray in color and scatters
light, when layered in <100 nm sheets, it is optically transparent.
This optical transparency coupled with its electrical conductivity
lends indium tin oxide to practical applications, such as LED displays.
Nanotechnology has broad applications for spatial omics methods
and biomedicine.
19
Nanomaterials exist
within the same size domain as subcellular organelles and biological
macromolecules, giving them the ability to exhibit similar functionality
at the biomolecular level. These include nano-objects, such as polymeric
nanoparticles, gold nanorods, and quantum dots. Specifically, gold
nanorods are used to enhance signals in spatial transcriptomics to
amplify signals from low-abundance biomolecules.
20
,
21
Moreover, nanostructured materials, such as carbon nanotubes, nanodiscs,
and nanocrystals, are also used to enhance spatial resolution in both
spatial omics and biomedicine.
22
−
27
These nano-objects and nanostructured materials have aided the functionality
of microfluidic devices to improve sample throughput and enhance characterization
of biomolecular structures at the nanometer level within instruments
such as nucleic acid sequencers, mass spectrometers, and confocal
microscopes.
28
Nanobiotechnology refers
to structures derived from biological macromolecules, such as DNA,
proteins, or lipids, and may be self-assembled; examples are liposomes,
fluorescently labeled DNA, and antibody technologies.
18
,
21
,
29
,
30
2.1
Integrated Applications of Nanomaterials and
Nanodevices
Nanomaterials, products of chemistry and classical
materials engineering, are defined by their size: either one dimension
of the material, or a single unit within, measures between 1 and 100
nm. Under this broad definition, nanomaterials can be distinguished
by their elemental composition. Careful manipulation of the elemental
composition allows the nanomaterial to be tailored to the application
of interest. But nanomaterials can also be distinguished by their
dimensionality, being categorized as zero-, one-, two-, or three-dimensional,
31
,
32
and nanomaterials composed of even a single element can produce
different properties as a function of their dimensionality. For example,
zero-dimensional fullerenes (i.e., “bucky balls”) have
different properties than one-dimensional nanotubes, which are distinct
from two-dimensional (2D) graphene sheets and three-dimensional (3D)
diamond, despite all being composed of pure carbon. In addition to
fullerenes, zero-dimensional nanomaterials include spherical nanoparticles
and quantum dots. Higher-dimensional nanomaterials have been designed
for advantageous mechanical or chemical properties. One-dimensional
nanomaterials provide classic examples of this, carbon nanotubes feature
enhanced tensile strength and gold nanorods boast increased electrical
conductivity. Nanomaterials that are 2D and 3D are even more complex,
generated to leverage the properties that emerge from increased surface
area-to-volume ratios, such as the optical properties of indium tin
oxide nanolayers.
Nanodevices, also referred to as nanotools,
are divided into two broad classes. The first broad class allows scientists
to characterize inorganic and organic systems with nanometer resolution.
The confocal microscope is a prototypical nanodevice in this class.
Confocal imaging stems from refining the source light to a pinpoint
and visualizing an object after the light transits through a pinhole.
When combined with fluorescence, this optical advance has increased
the resolution of imaging below the 1 μm threshold of the classical
light microscope. Although initially applied to materials science,
the combination of higher resolution and diminished photobleaching
effects makes confocal fluorescence microscopy ideal for biological
applications, including the imaging of tissues and live cells. Other
nanodevices in this class assist in analyzing complex materials and
mixtures to identify individual nanoscale components. Most popular
among these tools is mass spectrometry, which involves desorbing molecules
from a sample via ionization and determining their identity by examining
mass-to-charge ratios. High sensitivity variations of mass spectrometry
exist, such as Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS), which can identify
components of organic and inorganic materials and mixtures with resolution
as low as 50 nm.
33
,
34
Quantitative mass spectrometry
has also been used to identify protein–protein interactions
within cell extracts, especially after enrichment by antibody-mediated
affinity purification.
35
,
36
The second broad class of nanodevices
comprises nanoscale systems that increase the efficiency of biological
or chemical reactions. One such nanodevice is the microfluidic chip,
which has miniaturized chambers or channels and can be used to carry
out biochemical reactions or separations as a result of fluidic properties
specific to nanoscale dimensions. Such nanodevices have been used
for the detection and analysis of various biochemical and biological
targets, including DNA, proteins, molecules, and viruses.
37
−
43
2.2
Nanobiotechnology
Nanobiotechnology
describes the interface between nanotechnology and biology. One established
example of nanobiotechnology is the liposome, a nanometer-sized lipid
structure composed of a lipid bilayer surrounding an aqueous environment.
Within this aqueous environment, groups of biologically relevant molecules
can be sequestered, stored, and delivered. Liposomes have been instrumental
for carrying nanosized cargo—they were the engineered nanoparticles
used for drug delivery
15
—and for
enclosing nanosized chemical reactions, as has been done in microfluidic
chips.
A second established example of nanobiotechnology is
DNA nanotechnology, which uses engineered duplex DNA strands as the
nanoscale engineering material.
16
,
44
−
47
One type, structural DNA nanotechnology, uses DNA as a physical
material unit for the self-assembly of nanoscale structures.
18
,
29
Another type, dynamic DNA nanotechnology, is focused on reconfigurable
and autonomous devices such as the amplification approach hybridization
chain reaction, which uses secondary loop structure hairpin DNA monomers
as an energy source.
46
,
48
−
50
In this type,
DNA probes labeled with a fluorescent molecule are used for pathogen
detection, protein detection, and nanoscale imaging.
21
,
30
A third established example is a device or tool that incorporates
nanosized, membrane-spanning protein channels, which exhibit the nanofluidic
phenomena.
28
These protein channels can
be designed to allow the transit of specific molecules through the
narrow, nanometer-wide pore due to osmotic drivers, and coupling the
transit of specific biomolecules to changes in ion movements (ie,
currents) allows for the detection of specific molecular transit events.
This can be used to distinguish nucleotides, as in nanopore sequencing.
3
Key Nanotechnologies for Spatial Omics
Nanotechnologies, described generally in the previous section,
have supported the construction of spatial omics methods.
51
,
52
In the following section, we define spatial omics and describe several
specific nanotechnologies that have been crucial for the development
of spatial omics methods. Spatial omics provides global biomolecule
information—including data from transcriptomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, and epigenomics—layered onto a histological landscape.
In other words, spatial omics provides omics information while preserving
spatial information at sufficient resolution for each application
(
Figure
1
).
1
,
3
,
53
,
54
The resolution of spatial omics has improved over time, from the
1 μm limit of traditional light microscopy to almost 1 nm. Spatial
multiomics are also possible, with current technologies allowing for
the simultaneous evaluation of two or more biomolecular domains.
55
An example is the simultaneous evaluation of
transcriptomics and proteomics via subcellular views of global RNA
and protein overlaid onto 3D histological structures.
56
−
58
Figure 1
Spatial
omics provide information about transcriptomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, and epigenomics while preserving spatial information,
such as subcellular localization. Examples of nanotechnology for biological
applications are shown. Abbreviations: mRNA: mRNA; miRNA: microRNA;
snRNA: small nuclear RNA; snoRNA: small nucleolar RNA; siRNA: small
interfering RNA; lncRNA: long noncoding RNA; SNV: Single-Nucleotide
Polymorphism; MHC: Major Histocompatibility Complex. The figure was
created with BioRender.
3.1
Nanodevices for Spatial Omics
Nanodevices
support spatial omics by providing nanoscale compartments that can
recapitulate physiologically relevant cellular activity while also
increasing throughput with parallel reactions. Microfluidic devices
are one example, employed in the spatial multiomics methods Deterministic
Barcoding in Tissue for spatial omics sequencing (DBiT-seq) and Spatial
Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin and RNA using Sequencing
(spatial-ATAC-seq). In DBiT-seq, channels in a microfluidic chip demarcate
regions on a tissue section, ultimately creating a series of separate
assays to define tissue pixels for protein or RNA detection. Other
examples are microfluidic valve-, droplet- or nanowell-based technologies,
which are emerging in the field of single-cell transcriptomics due
to their superior ability to capture and process single cells and
their components.
59
,
60
Nanoscale droplets can also contain
specific biological components to perform numerous parallel biochemical
reactions within a small volume. For example, Macosko et al. developed
a microfluidic single-cell transcriptomics platform called Drop-seq,
which brings single cells and barcoded beads together in nanoliter
droplets, allowing numerous biological assay outputs from a single
small-volume reaction.
61
,
62
3.2
Advanced Imaging Techniques in Spatial Omics
Confocal microscopy provides high-resolution image localization
suitable for nanoscale imaging in spatial omics. The principle of
confocal imaging involves refining source light to a pinpoint and
visualizing resultant fluorescent images after the light passes through
a pinhole, thereby increasing the resolution beyond the 1 μm
threshold of classical light microscopy. This enhanced resolution
is ideal for imaging tissue and is widely employed in spatial omics
methods such as Enhanced ELectric Fluorescence in situ Hybridization
(EEL FISH), Multi-Omics Single-scan Assay with Integrated Combinatorial
Analysis (MOSAICA), and Spatially Resolved Transcript Amplicon Readout
Mapping (STARmap).
3.3
Mass Spectrometry in Spatial Omics
MS is a fundamental analytic method used in spatial omics, particularly
spatial proteomics, for high-resolution protein localization. MS characterizes
a sample by ionizing, separating, and detecting its components before
quantifying the abundance of the charge/mass values (
m
/
z
). Quantitative MS has been employed to identify
protein–protein interactions within cell extracts, especially
following enrichment by Antibody-Mediated Affinity Purification–MS
(AP–MS) experiments.
35
,
36
3.4
DNA Nanotechnology in Spatial Omics
DNA molecules form the basis of numerous nucleic acid detection strategies
within spatial omics. For example, fluorescently labeled DNA probes
enable single-molecule nucleic acid detection when coupled with super-resolution
microscopy, forming the foundation for methods like EEL Fish, Fluorescent
in situ RNA Sequencing (FISSEQ), and MOSAICA.
55
,
56
,
63
Employing DNA as a barcode is critical
for increasing multiplex detection capability and essential for investigating
complex biomolecular domains in omics research. DNA barcodes comprise
a specific DNA sequence that does not naturally occur in the examined
species. By attaching these barcodes to DNA probes, these DNA barcodes
can be typed and coupled to next generation sequencing technology
for detection. More specifically, they facilitate detection of binding
events to complementary target sequences, enabling multiplexed detection
by creating numerous independent labels in parallel.
DNA barcodes
are also the mainstay of regional biomolecule labeling,
allowing precise identification and localization of molecules within
a sample. DNA barcodes added to single molecules by ligation or polymerase-catalyzed
events direct the creation of a specific nm-spaced grid. DNA location
detection barcodes, each having precise location sequence addresses,
are added to distinct confined locales in series, allowing for the
identification of the original DNA. Adding the DNA location detection
barcodes can be accomplished with the help of microfluidics or other
technologies. DNA barcodes for multiplex detection and spatial mapping
have a central role in Barcode in situ Targeted Sequencing (BaristaSeq),
Seq-Scope, DBiT-seq, Spatial Co-indexing of Transcriptomes and Epitopes
for Multi-Omics Mapping by Highly Parallel Sequencing (spatial-CITE-seq),
and Spatial Cleavage Under Targets and Tagmentation (spatial-CUT&Tag).
Detecting individual nucleic acid locations is a facet of spatial
omics, and increasing the sensitivity of target detection can be accomplished
with nanometer-sized DNA balls (DNA nanoballs). DNA nanoballs comprise
thousands of copies of a specific sequence, which are produced by
Rolling-Circle Amplification (RCA). RCA is an isothermal nucleic acid
amplification method widely applied for the in vivo imaging of various
targets, including messenger RNA (mRNA), double-stranded DNA (dsDNA),
microRNA (miRNA), and proteins.
64
,
65
RCA utilizes a circular
DNA template and special DNA or RNA polymerases to produce a rolony
(ie, a rolling circle colony) containing thousands of copies of the
original sequence, termed a DNA nanoball, < 1 μm in size.
17
,
64
,
66
The sequences of rolonies in
the amplifying and sequencing mRNAs for in situ approaches are read
out by sequencing by ligation.
67
Expanding the breadth of nucleic acid detection capability in spatial
omics, many bioanalytical applications use RCA-based platforms that
combine RCA with DNA-zymes, aptamers, and nanozymes to form the basis
for in situ sequencing technologies.
68
−
71
RCA can locally amplify specific
nucleic acid sequences, and its ability to detect single molecules
directly in cells and tissues makes it ideal for in situ imaging,
revealing critical biological processes. For instance, it has been
widely used for imaging the spatial location of specific mRNAs within
single cells.
72
Related approaches using
DNA or RNA barcodes achieve cellular resolution for cell lineage tracing,
as in neuronal projection mapping. In situ sequencing approaches that
combine RCA with cellular address barcodes achieve high throughput
without sacrificing spatial resolution. In situ sequencing is the
basis for BaristaSeq, STARmap and Spatial Enhanced Resolution Omics-Sequencing
(Stereo-Seq).
4
Nanotechnological Applications in Spatial Omics
Approaches
After discussing nanotechnology in general and
providing specific
examples of key nanotechnologies for spatial omics, we now turn our
discussion to spatial omics methods, many of which rely on the key
nanotechnologies we have already mentioned. In the following sections,
we discuss spatial omics methods that evaluate mRNAs (spatial transcriptomics),
proteins (spatial proteomics), biological metabolites (spatial metabolomics),
and epigenetic marks (spatial epigenomics) and subsequently mention
multiomics applications (spatial multiomics), providing examples within
each biomolecular domain. For each method, we describe how it works,
give some examples of how it has been used, discuss its advantages
and limitations, and mention its underlying nanotechnology.
4.1
Spatial Transcriptomics
Highlighted
as Method of the Year in 2020 by Nature Methods,
73
spatially resolved transcriptomics combines transcriptome-wide
RNA sequencing with histology-based images to precisely map RNA expression
and thereby provide further insights into the cellular transcription
of biological systems.
1
,
3
,
74
Spatially
resolved transcriptomics can elucidate single-cell nucleic acid expression
throughout entire solid tissues or organs while preserving spatial
subcellular localization.
5
,
75
,
76
Spatial transcriptomics was accomplished by Laser Capture
Microdissection (LCM).
3
,
5
In LCM, a laser precisely dissects
a microscopic region (eg, a single cell), which may be input into
high-throughput RNA sequencing (LCM-seq). This method produced gene
expression profiles within defined ∼10 μm compartments
on Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) tissue sections, distinguishing
RNAs in tumor cells from normal adjacent cells to reveal important
molecular events in cellular oncology.
77
Later, image-based spatial transcriptomics was accomplished by Single-Molecule
RNA Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (smFISH). This technique uses
super-resolution microscopy to facilitate the acquisition of high-resolution
images (10 to 20 nm).
78
,
79
EEL FISH, a derivative of smFISH,
combines multiplexed RNA detection with high-resolution, large-area
imaging and generates faithful RNA quantitative maps that retain spatial
cellular information.
63
Spatial barcoding-based
transcriptomics like BaristaSeq, STARmap, and FISSEQ layer engineered
nucleic acid tags onto in situ sequencing technologies and use DNA
nanoballs to amplify the specific detection signals for imaging.
56
,
57
,
78
The following sections review
several tools available for spatial transcriptomics.
4.1.1
Enhanced Electric Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
EEL FISH is a spatial transcriptome profiling method that employs
a set of combinatorial, binary barcode tags to detect RNA overlaid
onto a histological image.
63
EEL FISH electrophoretically
transfers RNA from a tissue section onto a nanosurface coated with
an optically transparent and electrically conductive layer of indium
tin oxide (
Figure
2
A).
63
Electrophoretically transferring
RNA is superior to transferring RNA by passive diffusion, as is done
in sequencing-based methods, due to the preservation of RNA localization.
80
−
83
In EEL, after residual tissue removal, the result of the transfer
is a collapsed 2D grid of mRNA on the coated nanosurface with precise
in situ spatial information (
Figure
2
A). Next, a set of probes, tagged by combinations of
40 labeling barcodes, are used for 16 rounds of imaging (
Figure
2
A).
63
After fluorescent decoding and encoding of binary label
addresses, barcode identities define locations for numerous mRNAs
within a single fluorescence capture field,
63
which can be matched to an image of the original histological section.
One example of EEL FISH is its application to sequential sagittal
sections of mouse brain to measure the expression of 440 genes, highlighting
complex RNA expression patterns that lie underneath tissue organization.
63
Despite its advantages, EEL has lower sensitivity
and resolution than other tissue-based smFISH methods.
84
,
85
(The resolution of EEL FISH, defined by the diffraction-limited
imaging resolution of the fluorescent label, approaches 200 to 400
nm.) Future improvements, such as maintaining RNA stability, magnifying
the capture field, and expanding barcode detection, could refine EEL
sensitivity and resolution to match smFISH for single-molecule imaging.
84
,
85
Nanotechnologies that support EEL include the indium tin oxide capture
surface and use of combinatorial DNA barcoding to tag numerous mRNAs—the
latter a rudimentary example of nanocomputing.
Figure 2
Highlighted spatial transcriptomics
methods. A. Schematic illustration
of the EEL FISH protocol,
63
which involves
RNA transfer by electrophoresis, capture on an ITO slide, tissue removal,
and cyclic fluorescent probing and subsequent decoding. B. The Stereoseq
workflow.
86
First, the DNB-patterned array
chip is designed. Then, in situ sequencing determines spatial coordinates
of specifically barcoded oligonucleotides. Next, capture probes are
prepared by ligating UMI-polyT containing oligonucleotides to each
DNB spot, followed by in situ RNA capture from tissue and cDNA amplification,
library construction, and sequencing. Finally, the data is analyzed.
C. STARmap workflow.
57
The method integrates
hydrogel-tissue chemistry and targeted signal amplification, with
3D in situ transcriptomics using intact tissue. Part A was adapted
with permission under a Creative Commons CC-BY license from ref (
63
). Copyright 2022, published
by Springer Nature. The figure was created with BioRender. Part B
was reproduced with permission under a Creative Commons CC-BY license
from ref (
86
). Copyright
2022 published by Elsevier Inc.. Part C was reproduced with permission
from ref (
57
). Copyright
2018 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Abbreviations:
EEL FISH: Enhanced Electric Fluorescence in situ Hybridization; ITO:
Indium Tin Oxide; Stereoseq: Spatial Enhanced Resolution Omics-Sequencing;
DNB: DNA nanoball; CID: Coordinate Identity; UMI: Unique Molecular
Identifiers; STARmap: Spatially Resolved Transcript Amplicon Readout
Mapping; 3D: three-dimensional.
4.1.2
Spatial Enhanced Resolution Omics-Sequencing
Stereoseq is another strategy for spatial transcriptomics (
Figure
2
B). Stereoseq creates
a grid of spots on a lithographically etched nanofluidic chip, the
grid acting as a capture surface for mRNAs from a tissue section.
86
Each DNA nanoball spot is 220 nm in diameter
and the spacing between centers of two adjacent nanoballs is 500 or
715 nm (
Figure
2
B).
The DNA nanoball–patterned array chip has 400 spots per 100
μm
2
to define the pixel size. After a tissue section
is laid onto the chip, the DNA nanoballs capture mRNAs and, following
a second round of rolling circle amplification, create a library of
mRNAs from the original source, which have been sorted to contain
specific regional labels defined by the DNA nanoball grid (
Figure
2
B).
86
Stereoseq was used to create the Mouse Organogenesis Spatiotemporal
Transcriptomic Atlas (MOSTA), which defines detailed topographical
information about the stepwise emergence of tissue-specific cell identities
during organogenesis.
86
Stereoseq has been
performed to capture spatially resolved single-cell transcriptomes
of axolotl telencephalon sections during development and regeneration.
87
Despite the method having genome-wide coverage,
Stereoseq has limited sensitivity and may fail to detect the low copy
numbers of RNAs from low-expression genes. Stereoseq also has trouble
distinguishing single cells from a mixture of multiple similar cell
types, especially smaller cell types like immune cells. A updated
version, Single-Cell Stereo-Seq (scStereo-seq), utilizes spatial transcriptomics
and plant cell wall staining onto histological cell–cell boundaries,
allowing in situ single-cell transcriptome profiling in mature
Arabidopsis
leaves.
88
The nanotechnology
elements of Stereoseq are DNA nanoballs coupled to precise spacing
on a nanofluidic capture surface and next-generation sequencing.
4.1.3
Barcode Anatomy Resolved by Sequencing
Barcode Anatomy Resolved by Sequencing (BARseq) is a multiplexed
and high-throughput method for mapping neuronal projections at cellular
resolution. BARseq combines Multiplexed Analysis of Projections by
Sequencing (MAPseq) and in situ sequencing of cellular tagging barcodes.
56
,
67
,
89
,
90
MAPseq is a technique for mapping neurons by labeling large sets
of neurons with barcodes (random RNA sequences).
89
The advantage of BARseq is its ability to match nearby
cortical areas with distant subcortical projections by relying on
specific barcode sequences that functionally transit through neuronal
projections.
91
Unlike conventional optical
approaches to mapping projections, BARseq relies on matching barcodes
without errors over distance, and is, therefore, superior to other
multiplexed optical tracing methods.
92
Theoretically,
BARseq can label tens of millions of neurons in a single experiment
without a specialized high-speed microscope because of the combinatorial
diversity provided in the barcode design; for example, a 30-nucleotide
(nt) sequence set can generate about 4
30
to 10
18
barcodes. Moreover, the spatial resolution of
BARseq approaches subcellular dimensions, sufficient to resolve the
organization of projections across neuronal subtypes. The spatial
resolution of BARseq may be even further improved with LCM or direct
in situ sequencing of projection barcodes.
93
BARseq mapped the projections of 3,579 neurons to 11 areas in the
mouse auditory cortex and confirmed the laminar organization of the
three top classes of projection neurons (intratelencephalic, pyramidal
tract-like, and corticothalamic). Nanotechnologies that make BARseq
possible include DNA nanoballs amplified by RCA, fluorescent labels
of nucleotides, and multichannel fluorescence confocal microscopy.
4.1.4
Barcode In Situ Targeted Sequencing
BaristaSeq was published in 2017.
67
It
is a modified version of the gap padlock probe–based method
for in situ barcode sequencing compatible with Illumina sequencing
chemistry and is suitable for barcode-assisted lineage tracing and
mapping for long-range neuronal projections.
67
,
91
BaristaSeq uses reverse transcription to convert an RNA barcode
sequence into complementary DNA (cDNA) followed by hybridization of
a padlock probe and gap-filling ligation to create circular RCA templates.
91
,
94
Two distinct fluorescent probes, each recognizing a bracketing padlock,
are used during the gap-filling ligation steps. Fluorescence is evaluated
to detect probe pairs targeting the diluted padlock after rolony generation,
and Illumina chemistry is applied to sequence the samples and determine
probe identities. A spinning disk microscope and laser scanning confocal
microscope are then employed to image the sequencing. The accuracy
and efficiency of BaristaSeq was demonstrated by sequencing random
barcodes (15-nt barcode set) expressed in cultured Baby Hamster Kidney
(BHK) cells.
89
BaristaSeq increased the
amplification efficiency by 5-fold, and this was coupled with high
sequencing accuracy (>97%) compared with other in situ sequencing
techniques. BaristaSeq also has limitations; it has only been applied
to cultured cells, and its resolution is limited to the cellular,
not subcellular level. Nanotechnologies applied in BaristaSeq are
DNA nanoballs that function to amplify detection signals, fluorescent
probes used for the gap padlock detection step, and the confocal microscope
for imaging.
4.1.5
Fluorescent In Situ RNA Sequencing
FISSEQ was proposed in 2003 to selectively amplify DNA on a solid
substrate, allowing for targeted genome and transcriptome sequencing.
95
−
98
The next generation of FISSEQ provides transcriptome-wide in situ
RNA evaluation across multiple specimen types and spatial scales.
5
First, RNA within fixed cells is reverse-transcribed
with tagged random hexamer primers to generate cDNA. FISSEQ uses the
direct-ligation approach to produce cDNA fragments as templates for
RCA, and these cDNAs produced from reverse transcription of mRNA are
directly circularized using a single-stranded DNA ligase. Then, the
cDNA fragments are circularized and amplified with RCA. The RCA amplicons
are then cross-linked with BS(PEG)9, a bis-succinimide ester-activated
PEG compound. BS(PEG)9 reduces the nonspecific binding of probes and
has a highly fluorescent signal after the hybridization of the probe.
This creates 200 to 400 nm DNA nanoballs, comprising tandem cDNA repeats
of the target sequence, on top of a histology section. Partition sequencing
using pre-extended sequencing primers with random mismatches at the
ligation site reduces the total number of molecular sequencing reactions,
resulting in a minimal signal-to-noise ratio or number of position
changes after multiple rounds of rehybridized probing. In this manner,
FISSEQ achieves sufficient spot density and RNA localization to discern
individual molecules. FISSEQ uses color sequences at each pixel to
identify objects. The putative nucleic acid sequences are determined
for all pixels and compared with reference sequences. FISSEQ was used
to confirm RNA expression and localization in human primary fibroblasts.
5
The method can also examine other cell types,
tissue sections, and whole-mount embryos for 3D visualization that
spans multiple resolution scales.
56
Single
molecule detection is also possible, since FISSEQ improves optical
resolution and reduces signal noise. But FISSEQ also has limitations;
it is not suitable for all cellular structures and specific classes
of RNA, for example detecting genes involved in RNA and protein processing.
56
Nanotechnology elements supporting FISSEQ are
DNA nanoballs, fluorescent probes, confocal imaging, and the cross-linking
reagent BS(PEG)9.
4.1.6
Spatially Resolved Transcript Amplicon Readout
Mapping
STARmap uses targeted signal amplification and hydrogel–tissue
chemistry interactions to enable 3D in situ transcriptomics in intact
tissue (
Figure
2
C).
57
A specific set of cellular RNAs are amplified
in situ by a method called the Specific Amplification of Nucleic Acids
via Intramolecular Ligation (SNAIL). SNAIL achieves high efficiency
for in situ sequencing by avoiding a reverse transcription step. In
SNAIL, two cDNA probes hybridize to the same RNA molecule. One of
these probes (the padlock probe) contains a specific gene identifier.
This probe is circularized, and RCA generates an amplicon in the form
of a DNA nanoball that contains multiple copies of the specific gene
identifier (
Figure
2
C).
57
SNAIL provides a much higher absolute
signal intensity and signal-to-noise ratio outcome than that obtained
with smFISH probes. It also has much greater detection efficiency
than single-cell RNA sequencing, despite having a simpler experimental
procedure.
57
After amplification, the DNA
nanoballs are enzymatically modified and polymerized to form a hydrogel
that serves as a 3D cDNA library (
Figure
2
C). Then, the RNA landscape is sequenced
with the Sequencing with Error-Reduction by Dynamic Annealing and
Ligation (SEDAL) process.
99
SEDAL employs
two kinds of short, degenerate probes: reading probes and fluorescence
probes. The first kind decodes bases, and the second creates fluorescent
puncta from the decoded sequences. These two probes bind DNA targets
transiently and, after specific complementary ligation, form stable
products for imaging with a confocal microscope. For multiplexed imaging,
fluorescent signals are stripped with formamide, and another cycle
of bases are read, eliminating the accumulation of errors during sequencing.
STARmap was used to define cell types and activity-regulated gene
expression in the mouse cortex, from mouse brain sections and larger
3D 150 mm-thick tissue blocks.
57
A limitation
of STARmap is that it cannot independently fully define brain cell
typology in 3D anatomy. In the future, STARmap aims to study activity
patterns exhibited or experienced by cells during behavior in real
time. The nanotechnology tools that underlie STARmap include the SNAIL
method, which incorporates DNA nanoballs; the SEDAL method, which
incorporates fluorescent probes; and the confocal microscope for imaging.
4.1.7
Slide-seq
Slide-seq is a spatial
transcriptomics technology, in which DNA-barcoded beads are used to
reveal spatial information about RNAs.
61
,
82
,
83
In Slide-seq, DNA-barcoded, 10 μm beads are
packed onto a rubber-coated glass coverslip to form a monolayer. RNAs
from tissue sections are transferred onto the beads, with the precise
locations of the beads preserving RNA spatial information. Then, the
barcode sequence from each bead is determined by sequencing using
oligonucleotide ligation and detection chemistry. The Slide-seq had
low transcript detection sensitivity, limiting its utility. To address
this limitation, researchers developed Slide-seqV2, an improved version
of Slide-seq with an order-of-magnitude higher sensitivity that also
had better methods for library generation, barcoded bead synthesis,
and array sequencing. These modifications increased RNA capture efficiency
to a level ∼10-fold greater than Slide-seq, a level approaching
the detection efficiency of droplet-based single-cell RNA-seq techniques.
82
The capture efficiency improvements within Slide-seqV2
make it useful across many experimental contexts. Nanotechnology methods
important in Slide-seq are the use of beads 10 to 20 μm wide
for location mapping, DNA barcodes, and the confocal microscope.
4.1.8
Seq-Scope
Seq-Scope is a spatial
transcriptomics method that relies on an array of randomly barcoded
single-molecule oligonucleotides and two rounds of sequencing, conveniently
achieved by the Illumina sequencing platform.
100
Seq-Scope uses a array attached to a solid surface that
contains single-stranded oligonucleotides, each containing a randomly
generated barcode sequence called a High-Definition Map Coordinate
Identifier (HDMI). The HDMI oligonucleotides are amplified, generating
clusters, each with a specific HDMI sequence. In the first round of
sequencing, each HDMI sequence and its spatial coordinates are determined
by the Illumina platform. Then, HDMI clusters capture RNA released
from an overlying tissue section and corresponding cDNA sequences
are generated; these HDMI and cDNA sequences are determined in the
second round of sequencing. In other words, the first round of sequencing
provides the spatial information, and the second round of sequencing
provides gene expression information. When the data from the two rounds
of sequencing are combined, they allow construction of a spatial gene
expression matrix. Seq-Scope has a spatial resolution of 500 to 800
nm (600 nm on average) and achieves submicrometer resolution, comparable
to an optical microscope.
101
Seq-Scope
reveals the spatial transcriptome on multiple histological scales
and has been used to distinguish tissues within an organ (eg, different
regions of the liver and colon), different cell types, and different
subcellular regions (eg, nucleus versus cytoplasm).
101
Seq-Scope has several advantages, including high throughput,
straightforward procedures, precise measurements, excellent breadth
of transcriptome capture output, and high spatial resolution, making
it far superior to most other technologies. Seq-Scope is limited,
however, to the capture of the poly-A-tagged transcriptome, making
it less robust than spatial-CITE-seq or DBiT-Seq, which are capable
of spatially profiling the transcriptome alongside protein expression.
The nanotechnology supporting Seq-Scope is the set of HDMI barcode
sequences.
4.2
Spatial Proteomics
Spatial proteomics,
facilitated by nanotechnology, has revolutionized our understanding
of cellular organization and function at the molecular level (
Figure
1
). By employing nanosized
materials and techniques, researchers can precisely map the spatial
distribution of proteins within cells, tissues, and organs, unlocking
insights into complex biological processes with in more detail and
better resolution.
102
The synergy between
nanotechnology and proteomics has been achieved by integrating high-end
imaging techniques, such as LCM microscopy, Multiplexed Ion Beam Imaging
(MIBI), or CO-Detection by IndEXing (CODEX). Sample processing techniques,
such as Expansion Proteomics (ProteomEx)
103
or One Pot for Trace Samples (nanoPOTS),
104
have enabled the capture of nanoscale specimen volumes for multiplexed
mass spectrometry. Additionally, streamlined spatial workflows, such
as Single-Cell Deep Visual Proteomics (scDVP)
105
or 3D imaging of Solvent-Cleared Organs Profiled by Mass
Spectrometry (DISCO-MS),
106
allow for the
powerful and unbiased characterization of biological heterogeneity.
These spatial proteomics tools are described below.
4.2.1
Laser Capture Microdissection Microscopy
The imaging technique LCM microscopy has played a pivotal role
in understanding cellular heterogeneity with nanoscale precision,
offering the ability to study specific subcellular regions of interest,
facilitating in-depth examination of protein distributions and interactions.
107
In general, LCM enables the targeted dissection
of individual cells or subcellular structures from complex biological
samples, which are then viewed with a microscope. And in spatial proteomics
specifically, LCM is instrumental for analyzing protein distribution
within cellular compartments, studying protein interactions, and unraveling
signaling pathways in the cellular microenvironments.
108
By precisely isolating organelles from an otherwise
complex heterogeneous tissue section, researchers can analyze their
proteome composition, providing insight into their function and dynamics
in local cell populations without losing spatial information.
Individually tailored therapies, guided by the molecular profiling
of biopsy samples, have traditionally relied on techniques such as
immunohistochemistry and bulk genomic analysis.
109
While analyzing whole tissue specimens has shown promise
in predicting patient responses to chemotherapy, the process of extracting
these specimens introduces significant variability,
110
which stems from the diverse cellular composition of tissues,
the uncertainty surrounding the proportion of tumor versus host cells
in the sample, and the loss of spatial information about cell types
within the tissue. Hence, LCM has emerged as an ideal technology to
dissect cells at nanoscale for tissue spatial profiling to allow for
proteomic analysis of specific cells or cell subsets while preserving
their spatial context.
Given its ability to dissect nanometer
regions, LCM has been paramount
for understanding the spatial organization of tumor and immune cell
populations in tumor immunology and subclonal analysis, offering invaluable
insights into immunotherapy responses and the emergence of drug resistance.
108
,
111
Combining LCM with certain other nanotechnologies, such as Cytometry
by Time-of-Flight (CyToF)
112
and the NanoString
nCounter gene expression system,
113
,
114
has offered
analysis of post-translational modifications and their functions in
signaling pathways. LCM-guided mass spectrometry methods are rapidly
advancing for discovery applications from region-of-interest to single-cell
resolution; and mass spectrometry experts are beginning to realize
the dream of robust, high-yield LCM single-cell tissue proteomics
from either the same thin-tissue section or precision-registered serial
sections from a variety of tissue types. LCM microscopy also offers
high-yield single-cell transfer to a nanochip, subcellular precision,
and high throughput.
Despite its potential, LCM microscopy has
its drawbacks, including
the time-consuming nature of several steps: visualization, manual
cell selection, and collection processes. Typically, the choice of
cells for LCM analysis is made through direct microscopic observation,
but this approach is sometimes hindered by the poor image quality
resulting from the necessity of keeping tissues uncovered during the
process. But advancements in digital imaging, liquid coverslip chemistry,
artificial intelligence, and automation are anticipated to overcome
these challenges and revolutionize the field of tissue spatial profiling
in the future.
107
4.2.2
Multiplexed Ion Beam Imaging
Like
LCM microscopy, MIBI has also helped to understand cellular heterogeneity
with nanoscale precision, allowing for the in-depth study of specific
subcellular regions of interest and proteins.
115
,
116
,
107
,
117
In MIBI, the tissue is first stained with a set of antibodies labeled
with metal isotopes (
Figure
3
A). An ion beam rasters across the tissue, liberating ions
that feed into a Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer (ToF-SIMS),
which separates the labels by mass (
Figure
3
A). Knowing which isotope label is bound
to which antibody, researchers can determine which target proteins
are present, and because the ion beam is rastered across the tissue,
multiplex images can be created.
118
,
119
To titrate
the optimal concentration of antibodies for MIBI, labeled antibodies
are screened in tissue microarrays. ToF-MS is utilized to separate
the marker labels for identification within the original tissue. These
images are partitioned to define cell–cell boundaries, which
allow cell phenotypes to be described as distances between signals.
Figure 3
Spatial
proteomics methods. A. MIBI workflow.
119
FFPE samples are exposed to a panel of antibodies labeled
with metal isotopes. An ion beam rasters across the tissue grid, liberating
ions, including from the isotope labels bound to proteins in the tissue
via specific antibodies. Time-of-flight mass spectrometry separates
the labels based on mass for the detection of proteins present in
the tissue. B. CODEX workflow.
123
,
124
FFPE or fresh frozen
tissue is exposed to a panel of antibodies, each conjugated with a
specific oligonucleotide (DNA) barcode. The tissue is then stained
with three complementary oligonucleotides conjugated to fluorescent
dyes. After imaging, the first set of oligonucleotides is stripped
off, another set of oligonucleotides conjugated to fluorescent dyes
is added, and the tissue is imaged again. This cycle is repeated until
all antibodies from the panel have been imaged. Part A was adapted
with permission form ref (
119
). Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. Part B was adapted with
permission under a Creative Commons CC-BY license form ref (
124
). Copyright 2018, published
by Elsevier. The figures were created with BioRender. Abbreviations:
MIBI: Multiplexed Ion Beam Imaging; FFPE: Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded;
CODEX: CO-Detection by Indexing.
MIBI has been applied to study the tumor microenvironment,
identifying
cell phenotypes and analyzing spatial relationships across numerous
tumor types, such as the spatial relationships between immune and
cancer cells and the specific locations of immunoregulatory proteins.
118
−
121
Advantages of MIBI center around its high-parameter capabilities,
high sensitivity, and subcellular resolution. Recent advances for
MIBI using ion beam tuning targets image resolution at varying depths
via multiple
z
-direction scans, allowing for reconstruction
of 250 nm 3D images in the axial direction.
122
But MIBI also has drawbacks: long imaging times and high cost. The
processing time of mass spectrometry data obtained from each pixel
and converting it into derivative spatial images also confines the
sample area.
4
Nanotechnology used
in MIBI includes staining with metal-labeled
antibodies and data acquisition with the ToF-SIMS. A related nanotechnology
is the MIBIscope, a dynamic ToF-SIMS instrument that uses a gold liquid
metal ion gun as its primary ion source and produces a live image
of tissue topography using a secondary electron detector.
119
The results of this study illustrate that MIBI,
using MIBIscope, achieves high sensitivity and resolution when studying
the spatial tumor immune landscape.
4.2.3
CO-Detection by IndEXing
CODEX
is a multiplexed single-cell imaging technology that uses DNA-barcoded
antibodies for spatial proteomics (
Figure
3
B). In CODEX, target proteins in <10 μm-thick
FFPE or fresh frozen tissue sections are labeled with a large panel
of antibodies, each conjugated to a specific oligonucleotide barcode
(
Figure
3
B). These
barcodes are detected, three at a time, in several rounds of hybridization
and imaging. In each round, complementary oligonucleotides, each labeled
with a fluorescent dye, bind to the barcodes, and the tissue is imaged.
Then, a gentle washing step removes the fluorescent dyes. This process
is repeated until all the barcodes—and the protein targets
they represent—are detected.
123
CODEX
employs a cyclic fluidic device to automate the rounds of hybridization
and imaging,
2
and it can be integrated
with any tricolor epifluorescence microscope (
Figure
3
B). CODEX has been used for cancer, autoimmunity,
and infection research.
123
It is capable
of spatial resolution around 260 nm in the lateral (xy) and axial
(z) dimensions to create 3D images.
124
But
CODEX requires special reagents and equipment and has several challenges
due to it being a fluorescence-based multiplexed imaging technology,
123
including limitations associated with the microscope
system, background autofluorescence, and the rapid processing of large-scale
imaging data sets. Nanotechnology elements supporting CODEX include
the microfluidics system for repeated target probing, DNA-barcoded
antibodies, and the tricolor fluorescence microscope, such as the
Keyence BZ-X710 fluorescence microscope configured with 3 fluorescent
channels (FITC, Cy3, Cy5).
Current antibody-based spatial proteomics
methods have some general limitations. First, the number of protein
targets is limited. MIBI can image up to 100 targets simultaneously
after performing SIMS, although commercially available products are
only capable of detecting around 40 targets.
119
The CODEX workflow visualizes 50+ protein targets at the single-cell
level,
124
and the updated CODEX multiplexed
imaging platform can detect 100 RNA labels.
122
Second, antibody detection methods are subject to nonspecific binding,
epitope loss, and tissue degradation. Additional limitations for antibody
methods are related to the size of the capture region of interest
within the tissue slide, the time needed for fluorescent image acquisition,
and the cost of mass spectrometry detection. Furthermore, these methods
are based on relative spectral intensities and are only semiquantitative.
1
−
3
4.2.4
Additional Techniques for Sample Processing
and Streamlined Spatial Workflow
Nanotechnology plays a crucial
role in proteomics based on mass spectrometry, spanning various applications
and workflows. From sample pretreatment to mass spectrometry analysis,
nanoscale processing is integral, especially in single-cell analysis
(a cornerstone in several applications in the biomedical field). While
conventional proteomic methods based on mass spectrometry require
samples comprising more than thousands of cells to profile in-depth
identification, innovative platforms such as nanoPOTS offer enhanced
recovery and efficiency by minimizing sample volumes to less than
200 nL, allowing for the identification of ∼1500 to ∼3000
proteins from ∼10 to ∼140 cells, respectively.
125
Despite advancements in imaging-based and MS-based
methods, integrating nanotechnology remains a challenge, particularly
in connecting imaging data with protein abundance measurements that
have single-cell resolution. One platform, scDVP, offers a promising
solution by combining three techniques: cellular phenotype image analysis
driven by artificial intelligence, automated single-nucleus and single-cell
LCM, and ultrahigh-sensitivity mass spectrometry coupled with a nanoelectrospray
ion source. DVP enables the discovery and characterization of cellular
interactions and states with the added advantage of analyzing the
subcellular structures and spatial dynamics of extracellular matrix.
126
Spatial molecular profiling of complex
tissues is further enhanced by nanoscale staining techniques. For
instance, DISCO-MS combines whole organism clearing, image analysis
based on deep learning, robotic tissue extraction assisted by nanoboosters,
and ultrahigh-sensitivity mass spectrometry to yield proteome data
identifying more than 6,000 proteins across various clearing conditions.
127
Other nanotechnologies combined with mass spectrometry
to allow high resolution spatial profiling include ProteomEx, which—using
manual microsampling without custom or special equipment—enabled
quantitative profiling of the spatial variability of the proteome
at ∼160 μm lateral resolution in mammalian tissues, equivalent
to the tissue volume of 0.61 nL.
128
In
addition, a Microscaffold Assisted Spatial Proteomics (MASP) strategy,
based on spatially resolved microcompartmentalization of tissue using
a 3D-printed microscaffold, mapped more than 5000 cerebral proteins
in the mouse brain, including numerous important brain markers, transporters,
and regulators, that were identified by a trapping nano-LC and high-resolution
mass spectrometry system.
129
Furthermore,
Mass Spectrometry Imaging (MSI) is another powerful tool for mapping
of the spatial distribution of proteins by label-free quantification
in biological tissues. For instance, Nanospray Desorption Electrospray
Ionization (nano-DESI) MSI generates multiply charged protein ions,
advantageous for the identification of top-down proteomics analysis,
achieving proteoform mapping in mouse tissues with a spatial resolution
down to 7 μm.
130
4.3
Spatial Metabolomics
Developed only
two decades ago, spatial metabolomics is another emerging field within
spatial omics that has enabled the identification of metabolites within
the spatial contexts of cells, tissues, organs, and organisms.
131
Spatial metabolomics uses imaging technology
based on mass spectrometry, including Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization
(MALDI) MSI,
3
,
132
Desorption Electrospray Ionization
(DESI) MSI,
133
,
134
and SIMS imaging.
135
4.3.1
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Mass
Spectrometry Imaging
MALDI is an ionization method used in
conjunction with MSI for spatial metabolomics. MALDI requires a sample
preparation step that involves mixing the sample with a protective
low molecular weight matrix before spotting the mixture onto stainless
steel and allowing it to crystallize. Next, the samples are exposed
to a scanning laser, transforming solid components into charged gaseous
particles, ionizing the sample within a 10 μm-wide window (
Figure
4
A). Finally, mass
spectrometry detects these ions to define each metabolite image location
(
Figure
4
A).
136
Figure 4
Spatial metabolomics methods. Each technique employs frozen
or
FFPE tissues,
133
and processes before MSI
are shown. A. Schematic of MALDI. MALDI requires a sample preparation
step; tissue samples are first coated with a low molecular weight
matrix.
140
,
167
B. Schematic of DESI.
168
DESI directly sprays samples with an electronically charged
solution for ionization, allowing desorption via a solvent stream
under ambient conditions.
147
,
168
C. Schematic of SIMS.
SIMS bombards sample surfaces with an ion beam to induce ionization
and desorption in an ultrahigh vacuum.
33
,
58
Part A was
reproduced with permission from ref (
167
). Copyright 2016 Elsevier and the Copyright
Clearance Center. Part B was reproduced with permission from ref (
168
). Copyright 2004 The American
Association for the Advancement of Science. Part C was reproduced
with permission ref (
58
). Copyright 2016 Elsevier and the Copyright Clearance Center. Abbreviations:
FFPE: Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded; MSI: Mass Spectrometry Imaging;
MALDI: Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization; DESI: Desorption
Electrospray Ionization; SIMS: Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Imaging.
MALDI mass spectrometry imaging has benefits, but
also limitations.
It has better metabolite coverage than other spatial metabolomics
methods, and consistently detects hundreds of metabolites at a spatial
resolution of around 10 μm.
133
,
136
,
137
Even better, atmospheric pressure-MALDI developed
by Spengler’s group achieves a spatial resolution of 1.4 μm,
138
yet the resolution is still worse than the
spatially resolved mass spectrometry approaches used for spatial proteomics.
132
,
139
The resolution often suffers when these approaches are applied to
metabolomics, to accommodate mass spectrometry instrument sensitivity
to low-abundance species from small areas. Spatial resolution and
sensitivity are inherently connected in spatial metabolomics techniques;
as the diameter of the laser spot decreases to achieve a finer spatial
resolution, the ion yield usually decreases as well.
136
,
137
Thus, researchers struggle to achieve finer spatial resolution while
maintaining adequate signal intensities. Other limitations of MALDI-MSI
include decreased resolution caused by delocation (when molecules
diffuse across or away from the tissue) and difficulty detecting low-weight
molecules (<600 Da). The matrix ions may have similar profiles
with multiple lower-weight metabolite ions, which can interfere with
the visualizations of select metabolites, defining a low-weight molecule
detection problem.
140
,
141
Although mass spectrometry
is the primary nanotechnology tool in
MALDI-MSI, nanomaterials have been used as alternative matrices to
improve various aspects of the method. Some researchers have increased
its sensitivity by adding nanoparticles to the low-density matrices,
which homogeneously concentrates targets into a narrow ring, similar
to the characteristic ring-like pattern observed after a drop of spilled
coffee evaporates (the “coffee ring effect”). Advantages
of sample concentrating using this method led to higher signals relative
to conventional MALDI, especially for analytes with greater mass-to-charge
ratios.
142
Other researchers used nanoparticles
to enhance detection of triacylglycerols from lipid mixtures, which
are overwhelmed by other lipids in conventional MALDI detection. They
found a matrix containing citrate-capped gold nanoparticles enhanced
the cationization of triacylglycerols and effectively suppressed other
lipid signals, aiding triacylglycerol detection.
143
And in glycomics studies, MALDI matrices containing graphene
nanosheets and carbon nanoparticles improved sensitivity in the detection
of native glycans, which ionize inefficiently.
144
4.3.2
Desorption Electrospray Ionization Mass
Spectrometry Imaging
DESI is another ionization method used
in conjunction with MSI for spatial metabolomics.
145
,
146
DESI directly sprays samples with an electronically charged solution
for ionization, allowing desorption via a solvent stream under ambient
conditions (
Figure
4
B).
147
As the DESI ionization probe scans
across the tissue sample, desorbed ions from the tissue enter the
mass spectrometer, which collects mass-to-charge ratio information
that can be correlated with the spatial distribution (
Figure
4
B).
148
Unlike MALDI-MSI, which requires a sample preparation step, DESI-MSI
can provide spatial information about metabolites with little to no
sample preparation and does not need a matrix. It also does not suffer
from spatial assignment errors caused by sample movement.
147
,
149
But limited spatial resolution is a major challenge for DESI-MSI.
Most studies have reported spatial resolutions of only 50 to 200 μm
due to multiple factors such as solvent composition, capillary size,
and gas flow rate.
150
And in addition to
these factors, resolution is also limited when balancing sensitivity
for low abundance species, as in MALDI-MSI. To improve the resolution,
Laskin et al. developed nano-DESI MSI, which used two fused silica
capillaries: a primary capillary that supplied solvent and maintained
a liquid bridge with the sample, and a secondary capillary that transported
the analyze to the mass spectrometer.
35
,
151
Next, they
developed an approach to control the distance between the nano-DESI
probe and the sample with shear force microscopy for MSI in constant-distance
mode, thereby achieving ∼11 μm spatial resolution in
images of mouse pancreatic islets.
152
The
researchers also coupled a portable nano-DESI probe to a drift tube
ion mobility spectrometry-mass spectrometer, which allowed imaging
of drift time-separated ions of mice uterine tissues with a spatial
resolution less than 25 μm.
153
An
ion mobility spectrometer recorded the drift time to determine the
ion mobility.
154
An ion mobility spectrometer
recorded the drift time, meaning the time it takes for each ion to
reach a detector. In addition to its resolution issues, another challenge
of DESI-MSI is its sensitivity and specificity. This has been improved
by adding silver ions to the nano-DESI solvent, but only for analytes
containing double bonds.
155
Nanotechnology
tools that support DESI-MSI include MSI, nanospray (ie, nano droplets),
and the DESI ionization probe.
4.3.3
Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Imaging
SIMS is yet another ionization method used in conjunction with
MSI for spatial metabolomics. Rather than a laser or charged spray,
a primary ion beam scans across the sample, bombarding the surface
to induce ionization in an ultrahigh vacuum (
Figure
4
C).
33
The ionization
of molecules at the sample surface generates a secondary beam of sputtered
ions of opposite polarity, which are transferred to a mass analyzer
(
Figure
4
C).
156
An advantage of this method is spatial resolution.
The primary ion beam is highly focused and impacts samples with an
orthogonal angle, as opposed to the oblique angle utilized for desorption
catalysts in MALDI and DESI. This degree of control enhances spatial
resolution, which can reach as low as 50 nm,
157
making it possible to distinguish molecules between different organelles
of the same cell.
158
But the high energy
ion beam (1 to 70 keV) is highly destructive, leading to the fragmentation
of biomolecules during desorption. As such, types of SIMS combining
high energy beams with high dose density (ie, > 10
13
ion/cm
2
as in dynamic SIMS) can only target monatomic
or diatomic
elements, limiting their application in spatial metabolomics.
159
Types of SIMS employing ion beams of decreased
dose density (ie, static SIMS) still produce degradation, but to lesser
extent, and initial versions of these methods provided sufficient
resolution to quantify biomolecules up to 300 Da.
160
To improve static SIMS, researchers have modulated the
primary ion beam to decrease sample destruction and increase ionization
efficiency, allowing for increased sensitivity to detect biomolecules
of lower concentration and higher molecular weight. Metal cluster
ion beams, composed of Au
3+
or Bi
3+
, expanded
the ability of SIMS to analyze low molecular weight biomolecules such
as metabolites and lipids,
161
while small
cluster ion beams, composed of C
60
for example, enabled
the analysis of high molecular weight biomolecules such as peptides
and proteins.
162
The range of mass resolution
was further increased by the introduction of gas cluster ion beams,
which improved the ionization efficiency of fully intact biomolecules
up to 100-fold compared to that achieved by metal or small cluster
ion beams.
163
Despite these advances in
mass resolution and dynamic range, the diminished dose density of
static SIMS increases dispersion of the primary ion beam, decreasing
the spatial resolution to a range of 550 to 900 nm.
164
,
165
Nanotechnology tools in SIMS imaging include mass spectrometry,
ion beams, and the nanoparticle coating employed to enhance ionization
efficiency in metal-assisted SIMS.
166
4.4
Spatial Epigenomics
Epigenetic modifications
(to histones or DNA) control the state of chromatin, affecting DNA
accessibility; open chromatin allows gene expression to occur, while
closed chromatin prevents gene expression. Thus, these reversible
epigenetic modifications affect cellular function and explain biological
phenomena on the cellular level (
Figure
1
). Spatial epigenomics provides information
about epigenetic modifications across a population of cells or across
a tissue, revealing global epigenetic changes. Spatial epigenomics
methods include spatial-ATAC-seq and spatial-CUT&Tag.
4.4.1
Spatial Assay for Transposase-Accessible
Chromatin and RNA Using Sequencing
Based on DBiT-seq, spatial-ATAC-seq
is a method that provides a genome-wide map of open and accessible
chromatin regions in intact tissue sections.
156
Spatial-ATAC-seq utilizes the in situ Tn5 transposition chemistry
169
and microfluidic deterministic barcoding as
described in DBiT (see
section
4.5.2
).
54
Spatial-ATAC-seq employs
the Tn5 transposon to insert DNA oligomers into genome accessible
locations on fixed sections,
170
,
171
and adapters containing
a ligation linker are added to label the modified genome accessible
sites. Next, a grid of barcodes is overlaid using microchannels, and
these location coordinate markers are ligated to the Tn5-generated
oligos in successive rounds, creating a map of barcode combinations.
The array of barcodes is then imaged and overlaid onto tissue morphology,
revealing the locations of accessible chromatin. Then, reverse cross-linking
frees barcoded DNA fragments, creating a 2,500-tile spatial tissue
mosaic, which is amplified by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and
is the input for preparation of sequencing libraries. Spatial-ATAC-seq
has the ability to capture spatial epigenetic information within the
mouse and human brain.
156
And the method
has also been applied to mouse embryos to delineate the epigenetic
landscape of organogenesis, and in human tonsils to map the epigenetic
state of different immune cells.
156
Advantages
of the method are high spatial resolution, high yield, a high signal-to-noise
ratio, and a pixel size of 20 μm at the cellular level.
156
A disadvantage of spatial-ATAC-seq is that,
unlike single-cell technologies, detected pixels may contain partial
nuclei or multiple nuclei, and thus signals may comprise multiple
cell types, which complicates data interpretation. The nanotechnology
underlying spatial-ATAC-seq is microfluidic deterministic barcoding.
4.4.2
Spatial Cleavage Under Targets and Tagmentation
Spatial-CUT&Tag analyzes single-cell epigenomes by profiling
chromatin states in situ within tissue sections, and achieves an unbiased,
genome-wide epigenomic map (
Figure
5
). The approach is based on in situ microfluidic deterministic
barcoding,
54
,
172
Cleavage Under Targets and Tagmentation
(CUT&Tag) chemistry,
173
,
174
and next-generation
sequencing. In the first step of spatial-CUT&Tag, antibodies that
bind histone modification sites are added to the tissue, followed
by secondary antibodies that tether a pA-Tn5 transposome (a form of
fusion enzyme used for CUT&Tag) (
Figure
5
). The transposome complex is then activated,
ligating linkers and insertions into genomic sites adjacent to specific
histone marks defined by the primary antibodies (
Figure
5
).
175
As in DBiT-seq and spatial-ATAC-seq, two sets of barcodes (A and
B), delivered by microchannels, are flowed over the tissue surface
(
Figure
5
).
54
,
156
,
172
Ligation of these barcodes creates
a 2D labeling grid, which is then imaged to link the tissue morphology
to the spatial epigenomics map. The output assay signal is released
after cross-link reversal, producing a library for sequencing quantitation
(
Figure
5
).
175
Spatial-CUT&Tag defined histone modifications
within the cortical layer of mouse brain during development, highlighting
the spatial patterning of cell types.
175
Despite this utility, the method has resolution limitations, with
a current spatial resolution of 20 μm pixels. To achieve higher
precision in spatial multiomics profiling, one could combine reagents
of DBiT-seq and spatial-CUT&Tag for microfluidic in-tissue barcoding.
156
A serpentine microfluidic channel or increasing
the number of barcodes could also help, reducing pixel size within
the epigenome mapping area. Using these two methods, Fan et al. achieved
simultaneous epigenomic and transcriptomic profiling on tissues from
embryonic and juvenile mouse brain and from adult human brain with
near–single-cell resolution.
176
The
epigenome was evaluated using spatial-CUT&Tag–RNA-seq applied
to histone modifications, and mRNA expression was determined using
spatial-ATAC–RNA-seq Spatial epigenome–transcriptome
cosequencing overlays spatial multiomics signals, synergizing data
from each method and allowing for the examination of mechanistic relationships
across the central dogma of molecular biology. The nanotechnology
supporting spatial-CUT&Tag is in-tissue microfluidic deterministic
barcoding.
Figure 5
Spatial epigenomics method spatial-CUT&Tag. Schematic of spatial-CUT&Tag
workflow.
175
Primary antibodies that bind
histone modification sites are added to fixed tissue followed by secondary
antibodies. The next step involves pA-Tn5 directed transposition into
DNA. Then, two sets of barcodes (A and B), delivered by microchannels,
are flowed over the tissue surface. Ligation of these barcodes creates
a 2D labeling grid for imaging. The final step is reverse cross-linking
and PCR followed by next-generation sequencing. The figure was reproduced
from ref (
175
). Copyright
2022 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Abbreviations:
gDNA: genomic DNA; 2D: two-dimensional.
4.5
Spatial Multiomics
Spatial multiomics
tools combine detection of distinct biomolecular domains inside an
overlapping assay window and are the goal for the field. Vickovic
and Lötstedt developed and published a spatial multiomics platform
in 2022.
53
Their automated and high-throughput
approach mapped regional RNA expression via sequencing-based biomarkers
and overlaid protein signals via DNA-barcoded antibodies or immunofluorescence
labels. This approach enabled the simultaneous spatial evaluation
of 96 sequencing-ready RNA libraries and 64 in situ protein targets
in 2 days.
53
Another spatial multiomics
strategy uses the GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler (DSP) from NanoString.
Unlike the spatial multiomics platform developed by Vickovic and Lötstedt,
which is limited to frozen tissue, the GeoMx DSP platform can be used
on FFPE tissue sections. And it is capable of spatial analysis profiling
for the whole transcriptome (18,000 RNA targets) and more than 96
proteins simultaneously. The GeoMx DSP, DBiT-seq, spatial-CITE-seq,
and MOSAICA are exciting methods that query spatial RNA and protein
expression.
4.5.1
GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler
The GeoMx DSP currently enables detection and imaging of RNA or protein
on either FFPE or fresh frozen whole tissue sections. The workflow
starts with staining of the prepared tissue (a 5 μm-thick section)
with antibodies and/or RNA attached to oligonucleotide tags (ie, barcodes)
via light-sensitive linkers (
Figure
6
A). Next, the GeoMx DSP automated microscope is used
to select regions of interest (in a varying size of 10 to 600 μm
in diameter). From the regions of interest, the microscope uses UV
light to cleave the oligonucleotide tags and collects the oligonucleotides
(
Figure
6
A). Then,
the oligonucleotides are analyzed with the NanoString nCounter System
to quantify levels of specific proteins or RNAs (
Figure
6
A). Finally, data visualization
and analysis are performed.
177
,
178
Since the instrument
was launched in March 2019, many groups have utilized the GeoMx DSP
to study biomolecular expression in carcinomas, supporting its use
as a standard tool for oncology research. The use of equivalently
tagged oligonucleotides allows the system to interrogate numerous
RNA and protein biomarkers with higher throughput, and GeoMx DSP simultaneously
profiled six nodular and six infiltrative cancer samples, interrogating
1812 RNA targets.
179
One study combining
Single-Cell RNA Sequencing (scRNA-seq) transcriptomes and spatial
transcriptomics identified Activin A as a paracrine-acting factor
that contributed to tumor progression.
75
A current limitation of the GeoMx DSP is its inability to achieve
single-cell resolution for biomarker coexpression due to low protein
detection efficiency.
78
,
179
Nanotechnology tools that underscore
GeoMx DSP include RNA probes conjugated to fluorophores to interrogate
specific biomolecule targets, the imaging platform, and oligonucleotide
barcodes.
Figure 6
Spatial multiomics methods. A. The workflow for GeoMx DSP.
177
,
178
Proteins and/or RNAs in tissue are labeled with oligos and regions
of interest are selected. Oligos are cleaved with UV light, collected,
and counting using the nCounter or next-generation sequencing before
the final computational analyses. B. The workflow for the DBiT-seq
platform.
54
ADTs are exposed to tissue
slides for protein detection. Then, a PDMS microfluidic chip with
parallel channels is placed directly against the tissue slide. Fifty
parallel microfluidic channels in the chip deliver a set of barcodes
(set A) and RT to the tissue. Then another PDMS chip is placed on
the tissue slide, containing channels that deliver another set of
barcodes (set B) and DNA ligase to attach the B barcodes to the A
barcodes, creating a 2D mosaic of tissue pixels. Then the cDNA is
collected and amplified, and proteins and mRNAs are detected by next-generation
sequencing. C. Schematic of the MOSAICA approach.
55
The tissue is incubated with a set of primary 25- to 30-base
nucleic acid probes that tile a specific mRNA, binding to complementary
regions and containing adapters. Then, for detection, the samples
are incubated with the secondary probe set containing pairs of fluorophores
that hone to adapters on the primary set of probes. The resulting
probe map can be imaged via a fluorescent microscope to capture the
collection of spectral readouts and temporal lifetime features. Refining
these raw data, bioinformatics-based tools direct the reconstruction
of images by spectral and fluorescence lifetime signal processing.
These images combine numerous target confocal detections, providing
transcript levels, localization within a 3D reconstructed image, and
are overlaid onto microscopic tissue structures. Part A was created
with BioRender. Part B was reproduced with permission from ref (
54
). Copyright 2020, Elsevier.
Part C was reproduced with permission under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license from ref (
55
). Copyright 2022, published by Springer Nature. Abbreviations: DSP:
Digital Spatial Profiler; oligos: oligonucleotides; UV: Ultraviolet;
PDMS: Polydimethylsiloxane; ADT: Antibody-Derived DNA Tag; RT: Reverse
Transcriptase; DBiT-seq: Deterministic Barcoding in Tissue for Spatial
Omics Sequencing; MOSAICA: Multi-Omic Single-Scan Assay with Integrated
Combinatorial Analysis; 2D: two-dimensional; 3D: three-dimensional.
4.5.2
Deterministic Barcoding in Tissue for Spatial
Omics Sequencing
DBiT-seq is a microfluidics-based platform
for analyzing spatial proteomics and transcriptomics, created by Fan
et al.
54
,
180
In DBiT-seq, tissue sections are exposed
to Antibody-Derived DNA Tags (ADTs) for protein detection. For RNA
detection and spatial analysis, a Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidic
chip is placed directly against the tissue slide (
Figure
6
B). Fifty parallel microfluidic
channels in the chip deliver a set of oligo-dT-tagged DNA barcodes
(set A), along with reverse transcriptase into lanes on the surface
of the tissue slide. Then another PDMS chip is placed on the tissue
slide, containing channels that deliver another set of oligo-dT-tagged
DNA barcodes (set B), along with DNA ligase to attach the B barcodes
to the A barcodes, creating a 2D mosaic of tissue pixels (
Figure
6
B). After imaging
by a microscope to define histological features, the cDNA is collected
and amplified to build a next-generation sequencing library. Finally,
proteins and mRNAs are detected by next-generation sequencing (
Figure
6
B).
54
DBiT-seq has been applied to study mouse embryos to measure
a panel of 22 proteins and mRNA transcriptome.
54
It has also been used for transcriptome sequencing within
embryonic and adult FFPE sections, at cellular resolution (25 μm
pixels) and >1000 gene per pixel coverage.
172
Performing spatial whole transcriptome sequencing on FFPE
samples
without tissue dissociation or RNA exaction is one of the strengths
of DBiT-seq as an in-tissue barcoding approach. A weakness is that,
even though the pixel size of DBiT-seq can be scaled down to 10 μm,
it is still not capable of directly resolving single-cell spatial
mapping. Nanotechnologies exemplified in DBiT include antibody-derived
DNA tags for protein detection, subnanometer microfluidic chambers
for creating a spatial barcoding grid, and the optical or fluorescence
microscope for detection.
4.5.3
Spatial Co-Indexing of Transcriptomes and
Epitopes for Multi-Omics Mapping by Highly Parallel Sequencing
Spatial-CITE-seq extends Coindexing of Transcriptomes and Epitopes
(CITE-seq) to the spatial dimension and enables multiplexed protein
and whole transcriptome comapping.
181
The
first step of this method uses a cocktail of ∼200–300
ADTs to stain a paraformaldehyde-fixed tissue section. The ADTs include
a poly(A) tail, a Unique Molecular Identifier (UMI) tag, and a DNA
sequence that is specific for select antibodies.
181
,
182
As in DBiT, two sets of barcodes (A, row and B, column) are introduced
using different microfluidic chips for ligation in situ, creating
a 2D grid of tissue pixels to coindex all the protein epitopes and
the transcriptome. The collection of barcoded cDNAs is then amplified
by PCR and used for next-generation sequencing library preparation
for paired-end sequencing of both ADTs and cDNAs, allowing the spatial
reconstruction of protein and RNA coordinates. Spatial-CITE-seq incorporates
200 to 300 protein markers, substantially enhancing tissue mapping
at cellular resolution, and offers the highest multiplexing to date
for spatial protein profiling. Spatial-CITE-seq can profile 189 proteins
and whole transcriptomes in multiple mouse tissue types and 273 proteins
and the whole transcriptome in human tissues.
181
In contrast, DBiT can only map 22 proteins at cellular
level resolution.
54
One drawback for spatial-CITE-seq
is the lack of subcellular resolution, a limitation across most spatial
multiomics approaches. Other weaknesses for spatial-CITE-seq include
competition between ADTs and mRNAs for in-tissue reverse transcription,
and poor detection efficiency for low–copy-number transcripts.
Protein coverage is also limited to a panel of surface epitopes, excluding
intracellular or extracellular matrix proteins, which limits the information
provided in regard to protein signaling and function. The major nanotechnologies
that support spatial-CITE-seq are ADTs and microfluidic chips with
nanometer-wide lanes.
4.5.4
Multi-Omics Single-Scan Assay with Integrated
Combinatorial Analysis
MOSAICA is a fluorescence-based spatial
multiomics imaging tool for simultaneous codetection of protein and
mRNA (
Figure
6
C).
55
The MOSAICA procedure uses formalin-fixed tissues
or cells, which are incubated with a set of primary oligonucleotide
probes that bind to complementary regions (25 to 30 bases long) on
mRNAs and contain adapter sequences. After a wash step, a set of secondary
probes, each with a pair of fluorophores, binds to the adapters on
the primary probes (
Figure
6
C). Thus, each target has a specific combination of numerous
dual-label probes, with emission spectra and temporal lifetime signatures,
and these probe maps can be imaged using a fluorescent microscope.
Refining these raw data, bioinformatics-based tools direct the reconstruction
of images by spectral and fluorescence lifetime signal processing,
to allow individual RNAs among a pool of detected targets to be visualized
(
Figure
6
C). These
images combine numerous target confocal detections, providing transcript
levels and localization within a 3D reconstructed image, which is
then laid over the microscopic tissue structure (
Figure
6
C). MOSAICA has been used for
10-plex mRNA expression in fixed colorectal cancer cells and multiplexed
mRNA analysis of clinical melanoma cells within FFPE tissues.
55
At low cost, MOSAICA achieves high spatial resolution
(x-y resolution of 100 nm and z-spacing of 500 nm) in a 3D context
(
Figure
6
C). As an
imaging-based tool, MOSAICA suffers from optical crowding, which limits
resolution for adjacent targets. But MOSAICA can be integrated with
other imaging modalities such as expansion, super-resolution, or multiphoton
microscopy to improve subcellular resolution and allow imaging of
highly scattering and autofluorescent tissues.
183
−
185
In the future, paired fluorescent probes may allow a barcoding strategy
based on Förster resonance energy transfer to tune the combinatorial
spectrum and lifetime readout.
186
Nanotechnology
supporting MOSAICA includes DNA probes, fluorescent probes, and the
wide-field confocal microscope.
5
AI and Machine Learning for Spatial Omics in
Relation to Nanotechnologies
Dealing with spatial omics data
poses significant challenges because
of its high dimensionality and complexity and the need for precise
spatial and molecular information integration. Recently, more AI-based
pipelines and packages have enhanced spatial omics research by enabling
the efficient analysis and interpretation of complex biological data
at a better resolution.
5.1
Workflow of AI-Driven Spatial Omics Profiling
The integration of AI into spatial omics follows a structured workflow,
which includes, in sequential order, data conversion and feature extraction,
data segmentation, spatial mapping of sequences, and data quantification
and analysis (
Figure
7
). Data conversion and feature extraction are critical for enabling
the algorithm to more effectively identify and leverage relevant patterns
and characteristics within the data, such as data indicating gene
expression or protein localization, in the context of tissue architecture.
Both 2D and 3D serial tissue sections can be computationally aligned
and reconstructed for a more detailed and comprehensive view of spatial
relationships in tissue architecture.
187
Data segmentation is a key process that aims to partition image
data into distinct regions corresponding to biological structures,
such as cells, tissues, or subcellular components. In bioimaging and
computer vision, recent AI algorithms have advanced segmentation significantly.
188
−
190
Also, accurate segmentation allows researchers to map the spatial
distribution of molecular data, such as gene expression or protein
localization data, within tissues. Segmentation techniques have shown
promise in correlating spatial biomarkers with clinical outcomes.
For example, in the context of lung cancer, specific spatial patterns
identified through segmentation have been linked to patient responses
to treatment, highlighting the importance of segmentation in both
research and clinical applications.
191
,
192
Spatial mapping
of sequences refers to the process of linking molecular data, such
as gene sequences or metabolite profiles, to their precise spatial
locations within a biological sample. This approach is essential for
understanding the spatial organization of complex environments, such
as the Tumor Microenvironment (TME), and for understanding how molecular
features vary across different regions of tissue. A notable advancement
in this area is the development of the Single-Cell Spatially Resolved
Metabolic (scSpaMet) pipeline, which identifies a wide range of metabolites
alongside multiplex protein analysis. This detailed mapping is crucial
for studying the TME, as it can reveal how different cells and molecules
interact, influence tumor progression, or therapy response.
193
Data quantification and analysis play critical
roles in accurately interpreting the complex molecular and cellular
information inherent in biological samples. For handling disaggregated
data, various computational tools have been developed, including many
popular packages such as Seurat, ScateR, Scanpy, and Monocle, allowing
researchers to explore omics data down to the single-cell level, which
facilitates insights into cellular composition, gene expression, and
spatial distribution.
194
−
196
On the other hand, a geometric deep learning
framework, PINNACLE, has been designed to generate context-aware protein
representations that leverage how proteins interact within their cellular
environment.
197
AI techniques have rapidly
advanced the spatial omics field by enabling more efficient analysis
and breakthroughs in understanding tissue architecture and disease
mechanisms. As AI pipelines continue to evolve, they are beginning
to extend into the nanotechnology field, where similar techniques
can be applied to nanoscale biological structures, further pushing
the boundaries of molecular and cellular research.
Figure 7
Workflow of AI-Driven
Spatial Omics Profiling. The integration
of AI into spatial omics follows a structured workflow: data conversion
and feature extraction, data segmentation, spatial mapping of sequences,
and data quantification and analysis. The figure was created with
BioRender.
5.2
AI for Nanometer-Scale Data Processing
The advent of nanotechnology has allowed researchers to elucidate
biological structures and functions at a better resolution, often
at the nanometer scale. For example, super-resolution microscopy techniques,
such as Stimulated Emission Depletion (STED) microscopy,
198
enable the visualization of biomolecules at
a resolution beyond the diffraction limit. However, the data generated
from such techniques are vast and complex, necessitating sophisticated
AI tools for their analysis.
Deep learning models, particularly
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have proven highly effective
in handling high-resolution spatial omics data. CNNs are widely used
for image analysis tasks such as feature extraction, segmentation
and pattern recognition in large data sets.
190
In this context, CNNs automate the detection of intricate spatial
features within biological tissues, providing insights into tissue
architecture that are otherwise difficult to uncover. The application
of U-Net, a CNN architecture specifically designed for biomedical
image segmentation, has further enhanced our ability to extract meaningful
data from nanometer-scale images.
190
CNNs
play a crucial role in the structured workflow, especially in the
feature extraction and segmentation stages, where they capture spatial
features hierarchically from 2D images.
199
Moreover, deep learning models enable the reconstruction of 3D structures
from serial tissue sections, advancing our understanding of spatial
relationships within tissues.
187
AI also
supports the transition from 2D to 3D analysis, allowing for the reconstruction
of spatial relationships across tissue volumes.
187
For example, K-means clustering is commonly used for sequence-to-location
mapping in 3D tissue profiling, helping to delineate cell populations
within tissue architectures.
193
Advanced
AI models such as CODA have been developed to visualize 3D tissue
architecture in large tissue samples. These models enable the discovery
of cell types and their spatial organization in tissues such as the
skin, lungs, and liver.
200
5.3
Machine Learning for Multi-Omics Data Integration
Integrating data across multiple omics layers—spatial transcriptomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics—is key to understanding the complex
interactions governing tissue function. Machine learning techniques,
such as random forests and Support Vector Machines (SVMs), facilitate
this integration by identifying correlations across data sets.
201
These methods have been employed in spatial
omics to merge multiomics data, thereby revealing the intricate dynamics
of cellular environments and tissue-specific processes.
202
Recent advancements in graph-based machine
learning approaches, such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs),
have further improved our ability to integrate spatial information
with multiomics data. For instance, SpaGCN combines spatial transcriptomics
data with histological information to identify spatial domains and
variable genes in tissues.
203
Additionally,
unsupervised learning approaches like Graph-Based Convolutional Networks
(DSTG) have been developed to deconvolute spatial transcriptomics
data, helping to uncover underlying biological relationships.
204
5.4
Nanotechnology and AI for Spatial Biomarker
Discovery
The integration of nanotechnology with AI has revolutionized
spatial biomarker discovery, particularly in the context of disease
research. By leveraging nanostructure-labeled targets, such as DNA
nanostructures, and coupling them with AI-based analytical tools,
researchers can identify spatial patterns that are otherwise indiscernible.
For example, nanotechnology-enhanced methods combined with AI-driven
models have facilitated the detection of biomarkers in cancer tissues,
leading to a better understanding of tumor heterogeneity and progression.
205
AI also plays a pivotal role in interpreting
spatial omics data obtained from nanodevices, such as nanoparticle-based
sensors and nanoscale imaging probes. These devices capture high-resolution
molecular information that, when processed by AI models, reveals spatially
resolved biomarker patterns linked to clinical outcomes.
191
The application of deep learning techniques,
such as geometric deep learning used in PINNACLE, generates context-aware
protein representations, offering avenues for precision medicine.
197
6
Challenges and Opportunities Ahead
Methods and techniques from the nanotechnology field have shaped
spatial omics to allow insight into biological systems on the nanometer
scale, providing analyses unfeasible before advances in nanotechnological
methods. The intrinsic properties of nanomaterials, coupled with methodologies
using nanodevices and nanobiotechnological tools, enable precise cellular
and subcellular labeling and sequencing. The goal of spatial omics
is, ultimately, to provide real-time, in situ multiomics measurement
of biomolecules at a resolution necessitated by the specific application,
which for some applications, may be nanometer resolution. But as evident
through this review, inherent hurdles within spatial omics must be
resolved to accomplish this goal.
Relying on PCR-based nucleotide
amplification for sequencing in
transcriptomics must be overcome to prevent amplification bias and
spatial context loss while improving dynamic range and throughput.
While DNA nanoballs have helped to an extent, they do not improve
dynamic range or eliminate sequence bias, both of which are inherent
in various methods of nucleic acid amplification.
206
To date, only de-novo sequencing has eliminated amplification
bias due to its specific chemistry and is both highly sensitive for
single molecule nucleic acid sequencing and independent of PCR.
155
Consequently, other nanotechnologies, most
notably nanopore sequencing,
149
,
150
have flourished in
this area. Initially developed for the stochastic sensing of ions
and small molecules, nanopores act as single-molecule biosensors,
facilitating ultrasensitive DNA sequencing in comparison to other
label-free biomolecular sensing techniques.
207
−
209
The commercially available nanopore sequencer, MinION, is a nanodevice
that employs a protein pore residing in an electrically resistant
polymer membrane, exemplifying lab-on-a-chip potential.
210
−
212
And rapid advances in nanopore technologies for sequencing long
molecules of DNA and RNA have helped investigate genomes, transcriptomes,
epigenomes, and epitranscriptomes.
213
,
214
Future nanopore
developments may enable miniaturized RNA sequencing via geometric
sensitive current disruptions, applied in direct contact with tissue,
improving detection sensitivity and accuracy at subcellular resolution.
5
,
78
Synergizing these nanopores with imaging tools could help to further
advance spatial transcriptomics and spatial epigenomics. Additionally,
nanopores may prove useful for spatial proteomics, for de novo protein
and peptide sequencing.
215
While
current research trajectories aim to combine spatial proteomics
with nanotechnology, spatial proteomics’ reliance on antibody
binding for protein detection defines an inherent limit for protein
or peptide coverage. The most widely used instrument in proteomics,
mass spectrometry, cannot analyze peptide sequences directly without
relying on antibodies. One promising avenue is using nanomaterial
matrices to enhance MALDI signals, which can dramatically improve
MALDI resolution.
216
Improving the sensitivity
of MALDI for spatial proteomics would allow for detection that is
free from artifacts due to antibody-based selection or detection and
would thereby increase the breadth of protein coverage in a step toward
whole proteome analysis. Enhancing metabolomic and lipidomic coverage
is also possible by similarly applying nanomaterial matrices to enhance
SIMS signals.
217
In terms of resolution
for protein identification, liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) is superior to all other techniques, but an inherent
limitation prevents the application of LC-MS to spatial proteomics:
low sample throughput resulting from lengthy processing times. Analyzing
the spatial transcriptome—2500 assay points within a 6.5 mm
by 6.5 mm section—can be completed in a reasonable time frame.
But comparable proteomic analysis, with similar coverage by LC-MS
and assuming 30 min per protein target, would take two months for
a single histological section, not including sample pretreatment.
Microfluidic platforms with embedded nanoscale features significantly
increase the speed of sample preprocessing while automating batch
sample processing and reducing scale for enhanced resolution. Microfluidics
technology is already used in single-cell proteomics,
218
and it is only a matter of time before this
technology is applied to spatial proteomic applications. Microfluidic
sample processing would still have the problem of lengthy LC-MS assay
times, but barcoding technologies could multiplex protein labeling
and facilitate analysis of up to 16 samples at a time. Among nanobiotechnologies,
barcoding has had the greatest impact, notably for its ability to
analyze >20,000 barcodes simultaneously. EEL FISH, for example,
exploits
combinatorial barcodes that can label thousands of targets after only
16 rounds of detection, representing a rudimentary example of nanocomputing.
Proteomics methods that similarly analyze more than 20,000 barcoding
tags simultaneously, as in transcriptomics, would solve the detection
throughput bottleneck for this biomolecular domain.
Once nanotechnology
and nanomaterials have been fully utilized
to increase the resolution and data throughput of spatial-omics studies,
we can anticipate an exponential increase in the amount of generated
data. Thus, analyzing these vast data sets while combining the results
of multiomics studies in coherent ways represents a corollary challenge
for spatial multiomics. Most current spatial omics focus on the 2D
level. The ability to integrate data from multiple planes and time
periods to create 3D images represents a wider challenge but would
also be a major breakthrough for the future of spatial omics. SIMS-mediated
approaches toward spatially resolved 3D metabolomics are already in
development,
193
,
219
and it will be exciting to see
how lessons learned from these technologies can be adapted to other
spatial omics domains.
Another domain that needs to be addressed
by spatial omics tools
is the secretome, circulating molecules including proteins, lipids,
and vesicles secreted by cells. Spatial secretomics has barely moved
forward due to a lack of tools that can accurately locate and discriminate
between internal and external cellular components. Nanoscale liposomes
have been used to characterize the nucleic acid composition inside
extracellular vesicles,
220
and it would
be exciting to study how these liposomes could be used to analyze
extracellular vesicle components on sections, including the spatial
distribution of these components. Extracellular vesicles can be used
as diagnostic markers to reveal information underlying disease development,
such as spatial interactions between pathogens and immune cells in
infectious diseases, signals predicting tumor cell metastasis in cancer,
and early changes in lesions to predict severity and progression in
neurological diseases.
As spatial omics methods develop, the
resulting data will increase
in complexity, and more AI and machine learning studies will be required.
Integrating nanotechnology-enhanced methods, combined with AI-driven
models, will benefit the spatial omics results to achieve nanoresolution.
AI and machine learning are necessary for fully utilizing nanotechnology
and nanomaterials in spatial-omics studies.
In summary, the
development of research methods for spatial multiomics
is flourishing with the support of nanotechnology, but bottlenecks
prevent in situ, real-time multiomics from being achieved. Increasing
the sensitivity, breadth of coverage, and resolution of spatial omics
tools by leveraging emerging nanotechnologies will certainly help
to improve spatial omics. These powerful tools are helping biomedical
science to further elucidate physiological structure and function,
and they provide superior diagnostic and therapeutic tools for disease
research.