Introduction
Esophageal cancer (EC) is a malignancy
that develops from the epithelial
tissue of the esophagus. It has a 5 year survival rate of approximately
20%.
1
Over 50% of all cases of EC originate
in China, and the disease is prevalent among disadvantaged populations.
2
EC treatment typically involves a combination
of surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy.
3
However, only a small percentage of patients with EC exhibit a complete
pathological response to neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy.
4
Radiation (RT) exposure causes scarring in the
heart tissue.
5
Ribosomal S6 protein kinase
4 is essential in promoting cancer stem-like cell properties and radioresistance
in EC.
6
The precise mechanisms underlying
RT resistance in EC are unclear. However, various factors, including
gene mutation, DNA methylation, and histone modification, confer resistance
to cancer cells.
7
Nevertheless, a comprehensive
and systematic understanding of proteins and protein modifications
after EC cell radiotherapy remains unknown.
Proteins and their
modifications are essential in cancer development.
The context-dependent dynamics of histone modification are essential
in gene epigenetic regulation.
8
The hydroxyisobutyrylation
of lysine in
N
-acetyltransferase 10 promotes cancer
metastasis.
9
The modification of the p53
protein with isoLGs reduces acetylation and modulates p53-dependent
gene transcription.
10
The lipidation
modification of proteins is a significant biological
phenomenon in which lipid moieties are covalently linked to proteins.
11
S-palmitoylation is the most common of the five
recognized types of lipid covalent modifications.
12
This process involves the covalent bonding of a palmitate
molecule to a cysteine residue within a protein, thereby exerting
regulatory control over its function. Palmitoylation is a significant
post-translational modification that regulates protein membrane association
and protein–protein interaction (PPI).
13
Palmitoylation can influence protein localization, transportation,
stability, and interactions.
14
Therefore,
it is essential in several cellular processes, including signal transduction,
metabolism, apoptosis, and disease development, including tumorigenesis.
PD-L1 palmitoylation inhibition reduces PD-L1 expression in tumor
cells, boosting T-cell immunity against the tumors.
15
A STAT3 palmitoylation cycle promotes TH17 differentiation
and colitis.
16
Targeting NLRP3 palmitoylation
has been proposed as a potential therapeutic approach for NLRP3 inflammasome-driven
diseases. The DHHC family of palmitoyltransferases initiates palmitoylation,
which can be reversed by several acyl protein thioesterases.
17
DHHC9-mediated GLUT1 S-palmitoylation promotes
glioblastoma glycolysis and tumorigenesis.
18
RT resistance is associated with several biological alterations
within the tumor and in the surrounding environment.
4
Studies on the RT sensitivity in EC to palmitoylation are
inconclusive. This study sequenced the proteome and protein palmitoylation
of EC cells between RT and negative control (NC) to identify therapeutic
targets for EC. This study aimed to clarify EC radioresistance by
examining altered palmitoylation and identify new therapeutic targets
by studying new ideas for EC treatment.
Methods
Cell Line and Cell Culture
The EC cell line KYSE410
(RRID: CVCL_1352) was procured and characterized using short tandem
repeat markers from Meixuan Company (Shanghai, China). Mycoplasma-free
cells were used to perform all experiments. The cell lines were cultured
in RPMI-1640 medium (HyClone; Cytiva) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS; FSP500; ExCell Bio, Uruguay), 100 U/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Cat. #15140112, Gibco, Grand Island,
NY, USA), and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO
2
/95% air
atmosphere. The RT group received an 8 Gy dose of superficial 6 MV
photon irradiation within 5 min.
Sample Preparation
SDT lysis buffer containing 4% SDS,
100 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol, Sigma, D0632), and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH
8.0 was used to extract protein from the cells. The samples were subsequently
boiled for 3 min and subjected to ultrasonication. Undissolved cellular
debris was removed through centrifugation at 16,000
g
for 15 min. A BCA protein assay kit (BeyoTime China) was used to
collect and quantify the resulting supernatant.
Protein Digestion
The FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation)
method outlined by Wisniewski
et al. was used for protein digestion.
19
A solution containing detergent, DTT, and IAA (Indole-3-acetic acid)
in Urea Lysis buffer was used to inhibit reduced cysteine residues.
Subsequently, the protein suspension was enzymatically digested with
trypsin (Promega) at a 50:1 ratio overnight at 37 °C. The resulting
peptide mixtures were isolated using centrifugation at 16,000
g
for 15 min and purified using a C18 Stage Tip for subsequent
liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS). The
concentrations of reconstituted peptides were quantified using an
OD280 measurement on a Nanodrop One device (Thermo, USA).
LC–MS/MS for Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA)
The Vanquish chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) was used in
proteomics assays for chromatographic separations. The buffer used
in this study comprised solution A, containing 0.1% formic acid, and
solution B, containing 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (85% acetonitrile
composition). An Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)
was used for data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry.
Subsequently, DIA-NN software (version 1.8.1)
20
,
21
was used to integrate all mass spectrometry data to analyze the
search library and construct a spectral database.
Sequence Database Searching
Mass spectrometry data
were queried against the UniProtKB reviewed (Swiss-prot) database
(UniProt-
Homo sapiens
(Human) [9606]-20240102.fasta)
with trypsin as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation
was designated a fixed modification, while acetylation of protein
N-terminal residues and methionine oxidation were considered variable
modifications for database searches. Each peptide could have up to
one variable modification. Peptide lengths were limited to 7–30
amino acids, and peptide charges ranged from 1 to 4. Fragment ion
m
/
z
values ranged from 150–2000.
The database search results were filtered and exported with <1%
false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum-matched and protein
levels, respectively. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were
defined as those with a
P
< 0.05 and an absolute
value of log fold change (LogFC) > 2.
Database Searching and Analysis for S-Palmitoylation Proteins
Spectronaut software (version 18; Biognosys AG, Switzerland) was
used to analyze the DIA MS data. Tryptic cleavage specificity, variable
methionine oxidation (M), variable protein N-terminal acetylation,
variable
N
-ethylmaleimide (C), and carbamidomethylation
(C) were used to analyze the MS data against the UniProtKB reviewed
(Swiss-prot) database (uniprotkb_
H. sapiens
(Human)[9606]-204141_2024_03_26.fasta). A minimum of six amino acids
per peptide and at least one unique peptide per protein were required
for identification. An FDR of 1% was established for peptide and protein
identification. According to the algorithm, site quantitation analysis
was restricted to carbamidomethylated cysteine sites that were confidently
localized with a site probability of ≥0.75. Intensity determination
was used to perform label-free quantification. The median ratio was
used to weigh and normalize the quantitative site ratios. A
t
-test was used to analyze the significant differences between
RT and NC samples. The S-palmitoylation proteins that were differently
detected between RT and NC were selected based on logFC > 3.0 and
P
< 0.05.
Bioinformatics Analysis
Microsoft Excel and R statistical
computing software were used to perform bioinformatic analysis. The
statistical language R was used to perform hierarchical clustering
analysis and generate volcano plots. Data were extracted from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot,
the KEGG (
https://www.genome.jp/kegg/
), and Gene Ontology (GO) (
https://geneontology.org/
) to perform sequence annotation.
Fisher’s exact test was used to perform enrichment analyses
for GO and KEGG with FDR correction for multiple tests. The GO terms
were divided into biological process (BP), molecular function (MF),
and cellular component (CC). The enriched GO and KEGG pathways demonstrated
nominal statistical significance with
P
< 0.01
based on the Fisher exact test. Additionally, the STRING database
and Cytoscape software were used to construct PPI networks. MoMo (
http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo
) was used to analyze the motif characteristics of the modification
sites.
Results
Quality Control of All Samples
This study used a ±
10 ppm threshold for peptide mass error and an FDR threshold of ≤0.01
and ≤0.01 for library characterization as the screening criteria.
Figure
1
A depicts the distribution
of peptides. Correlation and principal component analyses (PCA) were
used to analyze expression distribution based on the protein expression
in different samples.
Figure
1
B illustrates the expression distribution of the samples.
The median number of samples in the same group was approximately at
the same level, indicating superior data quality and good reproducibility.
The correlation coefficient among samples in the same group was good
(
Figure
1
C). The PCA
score plot of samples (
Figure
1
D) indicates a high similarity among samples in the same group.
Figure 1
Quality
control of samples. (A) Peptide length distribution of
the identified peptides. (B) Boxplot of sample expression distribution.
(C) Sample correlation plots (bubble plots). (D) Sample PCA score
plot.
GO Functional Annotation and KEGG Pathway of all Proteins
The data set of all proteins was used to examine the GO functional
annotation of CCs, BPs, and MFs (
Figure S1A
). All proteins were primarily found in cellular processes, cellular
anatomical entities, and binding activities. These proteins participate
in cellular biological processes.
Figure S1B
depicts the enriched KEGG pathway for all proteins. The top cellular
processes identified were endocytosis, cell cycle, and autophagy.
Protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum and nucleocytoplasmic
transport were identified as the significant KEGG pathways for genetic
information processing. The KEGG pathway enrichment involved in environmental
information processing was the phosphatidylinositol signaling system.
DEPs between RT and NC
LC–MS was used to identify
592 proteins in the RT groups, including 326 upregulation proteins
and 266 downregulation proteins (
Figure
2
A and
2
B). The top
20 upregulated and downregulated DEPs between RT and NC are presented
in
Tables S1 and S2
.
Figure
2
C depicts the heatmap of RT and NC Kyse410
cells in triplicate. MEX3D (Mex-3 RNA Binding Family Member D) was
significantly lower in RT, while heat shock protein A12A (HSPA12A),
neuropilin-1 (NRP1), arginase 2 (ARG2), and SLC2A3 were significantly
higher during RT.
Figure 2
Differential proteins before and after RT. (A) Number
of differential
proteins. (B) Heatmap of the differential proteins. (C) Volcano map
of differential proteins.
The DEPs were primarily found in cellular processes,
cellular anatomical
entities, and binding activities (
Figure
3
A). These DEPs participated in cellular biological
processes. This is identical to the GO functional annotation of all
proteins.
Figure
3
B
depicts the enriched KEGG pathway for DEPs. The primary cellular processes
identified were the cell cycle and phagosome. The significant KEGG
pathways for environment information processing were identified as
the Forkhead box O (FoxO) signaling pathway. Enriching KEGG pathways
involved in metabolism included alanine, aspartate, and glutamate
metabolism. We combined PPI relationships from the STRING database
and pathway-protein relationships into one network. Coincidentally,
those significant pathways were found in PPI. Coexpressed protein
clusters were found to be associated with ferroptosis, phagosome,
cell cycle, p53 signaling pathway, amoebiasis, viral myocarditis,
viral carcinogenesis, legionellosis, human T-cell leukemia virus 1
infection, complement and coagulation cascades (
Figure
3
C). Additionally, a PageRank algorithm was
used to select the top 50 vertices for the network (
Figure
3
D).
Figure 3
GO functional classifications.
(A) Enrichment of KEGG pathway.
(B) PPI network. (C,D) Analysis of differential proteins.
GO Functional Annotation and KEGG Pathway of S-Palmitoylation
Proteins
The GO functional annotation of S-palmitoylation
proteins was primarily found in cellular processes, cellular anatomical
entities, and binding activities (
Figure S2A
). Coincidentally, the GO functional annotations were consistent
across all proteins.
Figure S2B
depicts
the enriched KEGG pathway for S-palmitoylation protein. The cell cycle
was illustrated as the most essential cellular process. Protein processing
in nucleocytoplasmic transport is a significant KEGG pathway for genetic
information processing. The phosphatidylinositol signaling system
was the most enriched KEGG pathway in environmental information processing.
Identification and Quantification of S-Palmitoylation Protein
S-palmitoylation sequencing identified 1729 cysteine sites with
S-palmitoylation modification in the kyse 410 cell line between RT
and NC. Moreover, 830 S-palmitoylation cysteine sites were upregulated,
and 899 S-palmitoylation cysteine sites were downregulated (
Figure
4
A).
Figure
4
B depicts a volcano plot of
S-palmitoylation cysteine sites. S-palmitoylation modification of
receptor accessory protein 5 (REEP5), sarcospan (SSPN), programmed
cell death 4 (PDCD4), Myosin XVIII (AMYO18A), RTN4, TMEM19, DTNB (dystrobrevin
beta), and other proteins were decreased, while S-palmitoylation modification
of LGALS1 and other proteins was increased. There were 1729 S-palmitoylation
modified Cys-sites in 1044 peptides, with 685 of them containing more
than two Cys-sites.
Tables
1
and
2
present the top 20 differential
S-palmitoylation proteins and Cys-sites.
Figure 4
Differential S-palmitoylation
proteins before and after RT. (A)
Number of differential S-palmitoylation proteins. (B) Volcano map
of differential S-palmitoylation proteins. (C) Sequence motif logos
indicating the S-palmitoylation sites detected in proteins and the
composition of position-specific amino acids surrounding the S-palmitoylation
sites.
Table 1
Top 20 Upregulation of Differential
S-Palmitoylation Proteins before and after RT
accession
gene
protein name
Log2FC
A0A384MR27
LGALS1
galectin-1
5.71
B3KY36
MBLAC2
acyl-coenzyme A thioesterase MBLAC2
4.91
K7EQS7
KDSR
3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase
2.96
Q92614
MYO18A
unconventional myosin-XVIIIa
1.93
Q96FV9
THOC1
THO complex subunit 1
4.76
P07602
PSAP
prosaposin
3.92
A0A0Y0BS51
CUB domain-containing protein 1
2.29
Q8TCG1
CIP2A
protein CIP2A
3.91
Q13501
SQSTM1
sequestosome-1
2.44
B4DRS4
HTATSF1
highly similar to Homo sapiens
HIV TAT specific factor 1
5.06
Q9UI12
ATP6 V1H
V-type proton ATPase subunit H
2.38
A0A1B0GVV3
RILPL1
RILP-like protein 1
2.21
P52209
PGD
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
4.04
Q9Y584
TIMM22
mitochondrial
import inner
membrane translocase subunit Tim22
2.99
B5MDF5
RAN
GTP-binding nuclear protein Ran
4.69
B3KNC3
nucleolar complex protein 2 homologue
3.10
A0A384MTS3
BCAR3
breast cancer antiestrogen
resistance protein 3
3.73
A0A024QYR8
TM9SF2
transmembrane 9 superfamily member 2
2.44
A0A994J5B1
EPB41L2
erythrocyte membrane protein band 4.1 like 2
5.88
A0A1 × 7SBZ2
DDX17
probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX17
4.72
Table 2
Top 20 Downregulation of Differential
S-Palmitoylation Proteins before and after RT
accession
gene
protein name
Log2FC
B2R6C4
REEP5
receptor expression-enhancing protein 5
–2.45
B2RAU1
SSPN
sarcospan
–2.97
Q9NQC3
RTN4
reticulon-4
–2.50
B2R6E2
PDCD4
programmed cell death protein 4
–2.39
Q92614
MYO18A
unconventional myosin-XVIIIa
–3.27
Q96HH6
TMEM19
transmembrane protein 19
–1.68
B7Z6A9
DTNB
dystrobrevin
–5.62
P19075
TSPAN8
tetraspanin-8; tetraspanin
–1.95
Q53HA8
MCOLN1
mucolipin-1
–2.04
A0A2U3TZN6
CASK
calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase
–2.39
C9JJX6
ARVCF
splicing regulator ARVCF
–4.49
Q99959
PKP2
plakophilin-2
–2.80
P63096
GNAI1
guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(i) subunit alpha-1
–2.24
Q96EX2
RNFT2
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase RNFT2
–1.94
Q9Y2G3
ATP11B
phospholipid-transporting ATPase IF
–1.75
O60502
OGA
protein
O
-GlcNAcase
–1.93
B2R8C2
FRK
tyrosine-protein kinase
–2.87
Q9BRT2
UQCC2
ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase complex assembly factor 2
–2.77
Q96EX2
RNFT2
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase RNFT2
–2.98
D6RJC3
INPP4B
phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate 4-phosphatase
–1.79
MoMo software and hierarchical cluster analysis were
used to investigate
the S-palmitoylated sites from six amino acids upstream to six amino
acids downstream of the flanking sequences. The frequency of cysteine
(C) residue at position 7 and lysine (K) residue at position 13 was
the highest; valine (V) residue was highest at position 5, while cysteine
(C) residue was highest at position 7. Among upregulation of S-palmitoylated
sites, the frequency of C residue at position 7 and histidine (H)
residue at position 12 was highest in upregulated S-palmitoylation.
The horizontal coordinate indicates the position of the amino acid
in the sequence window (base sequence of the modification site), while
the vertical coordinate indicates the relative frequency of amino
acids appearing at each site (
Figure
4
C).
GO Functional Annotation and KEGG Pathway of Differential S-Palmitoylation
Proteins
The GO functional annotation of S-palmitoylation
proteins was primarily found in cellular processes, cellular anatomical
entities, and binding activities (
Figure
5
A). Coincidentally, the GO functional annotations
were consistent across all proteins and the S-palmitoylation protein.
Figure
5
B depicts an enriched
KEGG pathway for differential S-palmitoylation proteins. The top cellular
processes were gap junction and focal adhesion. The phosphatidylinositol
signaling system was the most enriched KEGG pathway involved in environmental
information processing. Protein processing in nucleocytoplasmic transport
is a significant KEGG pathway for genetic information processing.
Coincidentally, those significant pathways were found in PPI. Several
coexpressed protein clusters were identified, including proteoglycans
in cancer, shigellosis, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance,
nucleocytoplasmic transport, and mineral absorption (
Figure
5
C). Toll-like receptor (TLR)
2, Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor family (ITPRs), Heparan sulfate
proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2), cortactin (CTTN), glypican-1 (GPC1), IQ motif-containing
GTPase-activating protein 1 (IQGAP1), filamin C (FLNC), EGFR, CD63,
protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG), filamin A (FLNA), phospholipase C
gamma 1 (PLCG 1) and vav guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (VAV2)
were associated with proteoglycans in cancer (
Figure
5
D).
Figure 5
GO functional classifications. (A) Enrichment
of KEGG pathway.
(B) PPI network. (C,D) Analysis of differential S-palmitoylation proteins.
Discussion
RT is an important treatment option for
patients with EC. In the
past decade, genomic and transcriptomic studies have helped to understand
the molecular mechanisms of EC. However, molecular typing, prognostic
markers, and targeted therapeutic targets of EC based on genomic and
transcriptomic data remain relatively limited compared to other cancer
types. Proteomics and protein modification analysis reveal tumor biological
codes that remain inscrutable through genome and transcriptome at
a deeper level, thereby paving a new direction for cancer clinical
treatment research. This study examined the potential mechanisms by
investigating the differences in proteomics and protein modification
proteomics of EC cells before and after RT.
This study identified
266 downregulation proteins. MEX3D was significantly
lower in EC cells after RT. MEX3D has recently been found to exhibit
oncogenic properties in various cancer types.
22
Besides, HSPA12A, NRP1, ARG2, and SLC2A3 were significantly higher
in RT. These proteins have been previously reported in the literature.
Hepatocyte HSPA12A inhibits macrophage chemotaxis and activation,
reducing liver ischemia/reperfusion injury.
23
NRP1 enhances EC progression by promoting P65-dependent cell proliferation.
24
ARG is a key hydrolase in the urea cycle, and
ARG2 was aberrantly upregulated in various cancer types. It played
crucial roles in the regulation of tumor growth and metastasis through
multiple mechanisms, including regulating
l
-arginine metabolism
and influencing the tumor immune microenvironment.
25
SLC2A3 knockdown inhibited cell proliferation and migration
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, indicating that it is an
oncogene.
26
These differences in protein
levels before and after RT suggest that RT regulation activates tumor
suppressor proteins and decreases oncogenic proteins. Several factors
may influence this deregulation. A previous study reported that RT
significantly affects the cellular composition of the EC immune microenvironment.
27
We performed GO pathway analyses, and
the deregulated proteins
were primarily found in cellular processes, cellular anatomical entities,
and binding activities. Numerous proteins were differentially expressed
in EC, including significant upregulation of the cell cycle, DNA repair,
immune response, and EMT-related proteins, and downregulation of proteins
involved in metabolism and estrogen response-related pathways.
28
The results varied because we studied different
specimens.
The cell cycle and phagosome were identified as the
most important
cellular processes of differential proteins. Cell cycle arrest is
one of the causes of cancer resistance to RT therapy.
29
Phagosomes are highly dynamic organelles formed by macrophages
and phagocytic innate immune cells.
30
Autophagy
is among the most essential cellular processes for all proteins. Autophagy
is a fundamental factor in tumor survival during radiotherapeutic
stress.
31
FoxO signaling pathway was identified
in KEGG. The FOXO plays a pivotal functional role as a tumor suppressor
in various cancers.
32
Additionally, this
pathway was found in the KEGG pathway in mice with RT lung injury.
33
KEGG enrichment pathways related to metabolism
included alanine, aspartate, and glutamate metabolisms. The metabolic
landscape of gastric cancer revealed that alanine, aspartate, and
glutamate metabolisms were significantly associated with gastric cancer
prevalence and progression.
34
PPI revealed
and explained the ferroptosis, complement, and coagulation cascades.
Radiotherapy induces ferroptosis in patients with cancer, and increased
ferroptosis correlates with better response and prolonged survival
after radiotherapy in patients with cancer,
35
whereas the complement and coagulation cascade pathways are potential
biomarkers for chemotherapy resistance and survival in patients with
soft tissue sarcoma.
36
This study
investigated the underlying mechanism of RT through
S-palmitoylation modification in EC cells. We found that 830 S-palmitoylation
cysteine sites were upregulated, while 899 S-palmitoylation cysteine
sites were downregulated. S-palmitoylation modifiction of REEP5, SSPN,
PDCD4, MYO18A, RTN4, TMEM19, and DTNB were decreased. REEP5 depletion
causes vacuolization of the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum and defects
in cardiac function.
37
SSPN overexpression
improves skeletal, pulmonary, and cardiac performance at the sarcolemma.
38
PDCD4
is a tumor suppressor
gene that regulates cell apoptosis, transformation, invasion, and
tumor progression.
39
DNA damage causes
the Golgi apparatus to disperse, which requires the involvement of
GOLPH3, MYO18A, F-actin, and the DNA damage protein kinase.
40
RTN4 knockdown impedes cancer cell proliferation
in vitro and in mice tumor xenografts.
41
The top cellular processes were gap junction and focal adhesion.
Gap junctions are essential for coordinating multicellular behavior.
42
Focal adhesions are specialized sites where
cells attach to the extracellular matrix.
43
The phosphatidylinositol signaling system was the most enriched
KEGG pathway in environmental information processing. RT activates
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and AKT signaling pathways.
44
Protein processing in nucleocytoplasmic transport
is a significant KEGG pathway for genetic information processing.
Nucleocytoplasmic transport regulates protein levels and activity
in the nucleus or cytoplasm.
45
PPI identified
proteoglycans in cancer and EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance.
Proteoglycans are the main components of the extracellular matrix.
They interact with other proteins, soluble bioactive molecules, the
surrounding matrix, cell surface receptors, and enzymes, allowing
cancer cells to invade and metastasize.
46
These proteins are associated with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
resistance pathway, suggesting that potential therapeutic target genes
may be contained for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance. TLR2,
ITPR3, HSPG2, CTTN, GPC1, IQGAP1, FLNC, EGFR, CD63, PRKCG, FLNA, PLCG1,
and VAV2 were involved in cancer related proteoglycan interactions.
The mechanism of palmitoylation of these proteins in roteoglycans
in cancer requires further investigation.
Conclusion
This study demonstrated that RT significantly
affects protein expression
and S-palmitoylation levels in EC cell lines. Furthermore, RT affects
cancer-related cellular processes and pathways. These findings enhance
the understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the response
of EC cells to RT treatment.