Introduction
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic degenerative joint disease that has emerged as a leading cause of disability, particularly prevalent in the female population [
1
]. Epidemiological surveys have shown that more than one hundred million individuals in China are suffering from OA [
2
]. OA is now regarded as a total joint disease characterized by partial degeneration of cartilage, thickening of the synovial capsule, sclerosing subchondral bone, and forming osteophyte, as well as altering the structure of joints, ligaments, meniscus and surrounding muscles, ultimately leading to disability [
3
]. OA has become a prominent public health problem that imposes a heavy substantial burden on society. The pain and stiffness associated with OA limit patients’ ability to perform basic daily activities, severely affecting their quality of life.
The pathogenesis of OA is complex and involves a variety of factors, including mechanical stress, inflammatory responses, extracellular matrix reconstitution, and dysregulation of signaling pathways, all of which work together to alter compartment of the joint [
4
,
5
]. Knee osteoarthritis (KOA) is the main subtype of OA, and an imbalance of inflammation and cytokine dysregulation play key roles in its progression [
6
]. Clinical investigations have pointed out that synovial inflammation is closely associated with pain sensitization [
7
], while current therapies for OA primarily focus on pain alleviation [
8
]. Novel analgesic therapies targeting synovial inflammation show promise. Cytokine imbalances favor the production of pro-inflammatory mediators, which drive a cycle that leads to the degradation of the cartilage and extracellular matrix components by activating matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and hyaluronidase [
9
]. To date, OA management primarily focuses on symptom alleviation rather than fundamental cure of the disease [
10
]. The diagnosis of OA relies on medical radio image observation of joint degeneration, typically detected at advanced stages of the disease [
11
]. Therefore, the discovery of new and reliable early biomarkers is necessary for the diagnosis of early OA.
Exosomes are a class of membranous microvesicles with diameters ranging from 30 to 150 nm, which are secreted by various cells through paracrine signal [
12
]. These exosomes carry an abundance of biomolecules, such as proteins, lipids and RNA [
13
]. Notably, exosomes maintain their integrity in the blood circulation, effectively circumventing proteolysis and phagocytosis [
14
]. These features significantly prolong the lifespan of their cargo and enhance the efficiency of transport in vivo. These properties make exosomes valuable in the diagnosis and as clinical biomarkers for different diseases. Recently studies have reported that exosomes derived from synovium or cartilage contribute to OA pathogenesis [
15
–
17
], and are considered as potential markers of OA [
18
]. For example, exosomes released from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells have been shown to promote osteogenic differentiation through MYC/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway [
19
]. The expression of exosome miR-126-3p derived from synovial fibroblasts was significantly down-regulated in OA patients [
20
]. The exosomal miR-100-5p derived from mesenchymal stem cells protects articular cartilage via inhibiting autophagy in OA [
21
]. MiR-200c derived from synovial fluid exosomes has been shown to serve as a biomarker to distinguish OA patient and healthy people [
22
]. Pregnancy zone protein (PZP) in synovial fluid derived exosomes has been identified as a potential biomarker of rheumatoid arthritis [
23
]. Although there are many previous studies focusing on RNA cargos in exosomes related to OA [
24
–
27
], a deep understanding of the protein profiles in exosomes and their potential for clinical applications in OA is still poorly understood. Exosomal proteins are stable in the exocrine body and have a long half-life, and can directly influence target cells [
28
]. Therefore, our goal was to explore the protein profile of exosomes derived from synovial fluid (SF) in OA patients and healthy individuals. Mass spectrometry (MS) was utilized to explore the differential expression of exosomal proteins and to identify biomarkers for the early diagnosis and monitoring of the disease process in OA.
Methods and materials
Clinical sample preparation
Synovial fluid (SF) samples were collected from fifteen OA patients and six patients with history of fractures, meniscus injuries, knee contusions, or knee ligamentous avulsion injuries but without OA from Bao’an People’s Hospital. The clinical characteristics of the patients are presented in Table
1
. To improve the efficiency of protein detection, the collected SF samples were divided into 6 groups according to gender and KLG grade for labeling and detection. The study was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of Department of Medicine of Bao’an People’s Hospital. Informed consent was obtained from all participants before initiation of the study. All samples were collected from July 2018 to February 2019. The diagnosis of OA followed the criteria of American College of Rheumatology [
29
]. All SF samples were stored at -80 ℃.
Table 1
Clinical characteristics of all subjects
Group
N
Age, yrs
(M%/F%)
KLG
OA
15
69.14 ± 12.14 (41 to 89)
13.34/86.67
≥ 2
NC
6
35.17 ± 10.19 (15 to 43)
100/0
0
OA: Osteoarthritis; NC: non-Osteoarthritis; N: number of subjects; Age: values expressed as (Mean ± SD; range); M: Male; F: Female; KLG: Kellgren-Lawrence grade (0 to 4)
Isolation and characterization of exosomes
Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation according to the standard of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles [
30
]. Briefly, the SF samples were handled with gradient centrifugation at 300 g for 10 min, 2000 g for 10 min, and 10,000 g for 30 min and 100,000 g for 70 min to remove cells and debris. The pellet was dissolved in Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) and stored at -80℃. The extracted exosome particles were observed using transmission electron microscopy (HT-7700, Hitachi, Japan) and analyzed for particle size with Nanoparticle tracking analyzer (ZetaView, Particle Metrix, Germany).
Protein extraction
The exosome particle samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in lysis buffer consisting of 8 mol urea (U5378, Sigma, Germany) and proteinase inhibitors (4693116001, Roche, Switzerland). The mixture was incubated on ice for 30 min, followed by ultrasonication (80 W, 2 min, Bochang, China) and centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4℃. The supernatant was then collected and the protein concentration of the supernatant was detected by Pierce BCA Kit (23227, Thermo, USA).
iTRAQ proteomics and bioinformatics
100 µg of protein from each sample was reductively alkylated followed by enzymatic hydrolysis with trypsin. The resulting peptides were differentially labelled using the labelling tags of the iTRAQ reagents (113, 115, 116, 117, 118, and 121) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, the labeled peptides were pre-separated by an ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system with a C18 BEH column (186002353, Waters, USA). The peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A (5% ACN, pH 10) and eluted at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. The elution peaks were monitored at 214 nm. A total of 30 components were collected. These components were further separated by nanoACQUNITY UPLC System (Waters, USA). Then mass spectrometry of the peptides was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). The main parameters were as follows: the MS1 scanning range was 350-1,800 m/z; resolution was set to 70,000; MS2 resolution was 15,000; the ion screening conditions for MS2 fragmentation: the top 20 parent ions; the ion fragmentation mode was HCD. Proteins were identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer™ Software (Version 2.2). Only proteins identified with a fold change > 1.2 (ratio > 1.20 or < 0.83), p value (T-test) < 0.05 and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 were considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway and protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis were conducted by TopGO, cluster Profiler and String software, respectively. All iTRAQ proteomics analyses were offered by LC-biotechnology company (Zhejiang, China).
Enzyme linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
MMP3, DPYSL2, C3, C4B, and APOM levels of SF were detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (ELK Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted by Mann-Whitney U test by the Graphpad prism 8.
P
< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The predictive accuracy of the prognostic model for OA was assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. In this analysis, the factors considered were true positive and false positive rates, which were used to plot the ROC curve and calculate the area under the curve (AUC), reflecting the overall predictive performance of the model. The Pearson correlation was used to examine the relationships between expression of biomarkers and age or disease states.
Results
Characterization of exosomes derived from synovial fluid
Exosomes derived from synovial fluid (SF-exo) were initially extracted and characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and nanoparticle-tracking analysis. As shown in Fig.
1
A-B, SF-exo showed a characteristic cup-shaped morphology with an average diameter of approximately 150 nm (Fig.
1
B). These sizes were consistent with international standard of exosomes [
13
], confirming that the extracted small particles are exosomes.
Fig. 1
Characterization of exosomes derived from the synovial fluid of patients with OA. (
A
) Morphology of exosomes, with scale bar = 100 nm (left panel) and 500 nm (right panel). (
B
) The diameter distribution of exosomes
Proteomic profiling of exosomes derived from synovial fluid
The dynamic profiles of SF-exo proteins between OA patient
s
and healthy controls were analyzed using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics, resulting in the identification of a total of 432 proteins were identified with a labeling efficiency of 95.22% (Supplementary Table
1
). The volcano plots clearly illustrate the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in SF-exo, revealing 20 proteins that were upregulated and 5 proteins that were downregulated in the OA group (Fig.
2
A-B). DEPs were annotated using GO and KEGG databases (Fig.
2
C-F). In biological process terms, DEPs were significantly enriched in immune-related processes, including complement activation, humoral immune response mediated by circulating immunoglobulin, and immunoglobulin mediated immune response. Regarding cellular component terms, DEPs were enriched in several extracellular categories, such as extracellular space, immunoglobulin complex, and extracellular exosome. In molecular function terms, DEPs were enriched in antigen binding, immunoglobulin receptor binding, and C5a anaphylatoxin chemotactic receptor binding. Furthermore, KEGG pathway analysis demonstrated that DEPs were enriched in many immune-related diseases pathways, such as rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Collectively, these results indicated that DEPs in SF-exo were highly correlated with inflammatory regulation, and some of them may be therapeutic targets or biomarkers for OA treatment.
Fig. 2
General proteomic outcomes. (
A
) The volcano plot showed differentially expressed proteins. The red and blue dots indicate significantly up-regulated and down-regulated proteins, respectively. (
B
) Hierarchical cluster analysis. Red indicates up-regulation, and blue indicates down-regulation. The dendrograms represent the classification of proteins. The number in the color scale indicates z-score. (
C
) The bubble chart shows KEGG analysis of differential genes. The horizontal axis represents rich factor (ratio of the sum of differential genes enriched in a pathway to the number of genes annotated by the pathway). Bubble size indicates the number of proteins included in each pathway, and different colors indicate different p-values. (
D
) Molecular function (MF). (
E
) Biological process (BP). (
F
) Cell components (CC). The closer to red color indicates a higher number of proteins contained in each pathway
Comparative proteomic analyses of synovial fluid and exosomes derived from synovial fluid
We obtained a SF dataset from OA patients and healthy controls (PXD023708) from a publicly available database. A total of 377 DEPs were identified in this dataset, of which 135 proteins were up-regulated and 242 were down-regulated in SF from OA patients. Venn analysis of DEPs revealed overlapping expression patterns between the SF and SF-exo datasets, with five DEPs overlapping including C3, C4B, APOM, MMP3, and DPYSL2 (Fig.
3
A). PPI network analysis was performed on these five overlapping DEPs with STRING database, and the results showed that C3, C4B and APOM formed a tight interaction network (Fig.
3
B). The functions of the overlapping proteins were further determined using GO and KEGG analysis (Fig.
3
C-F). Among these overlapping proteins, DPYSL2 was involved in axon guidance, which was a key stage in the formation of neuronal networks. MMP3 was involved in some inflammatory responses, including the IL-17 signaling pathway, TNF signaling pathway, and rheumatoid arthritis pathway. C3 and C4B were identified as important molecules in the complement and coagulation cascades. APOM, an apolipoprotein, was enriched in antioxidant activity and lipid transporter activity. In addition, a large number of non-overlapping features were observed between SF and SF-exo groups, suggesting a specific mechanism of selectivity in the protein composition between the two sample types.
Fig. 3
Correlation analysis between SF-exo proteomics and the publicly available proteomic dataset (PXD023708) of the synovial fluid (SF) from OA patients. (
A
) Venn analysis of DEPs revealed overlapping expression patterns between the SF and SF-exo groups. (
B
) Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis was performed for the five overlapping DEPs. (
C
) Bubble chart shows KEGG analysis of differential genes. The horizontal axis represents rich factor (ratio of the sum of differential genes enriched in a pathway to the number of genes annotated by pathway). Bubble size indicates the number of proteins included in each pathway, and different colors indicate different p-values. (
D
) Biological process (BP). (
E
) Cell components (CC). (
F
) Molecular function (MF). The closer to red color indicates a higher number of proteins contained in each pathway
Validation of biomarkers for OA
Based on the results presented above, we selected MMP3, DPYSL2, C3, C4B, and APOM to identify their potential as OA biomarker. ROC analyses based on these five proteins, revealing that these proteins of SF exhibited high AUC values (AUC, 72.650-84.188), indicating their ability to differentiate OA patients from healthy controls (Fig.
4
A). Interestingly, these proteins in SF-exo were able to significantly distinguish OA from healthy people (Fig.
4
B). Further, the levels of biomarkers in the SF of OA patients and healthy controls were quantified using ELISA. We found that the levels of C3, C4B, APOM, and MMP3 were significantly higher in the OA group than in the normal group, while the levels of DPYSL2 were significantly lower, which is consistent with the expression of PXD023708 data (Fig.
4
C-D). Collectively, our results suggest that SF-exo may serve as a novel approach for the early OA detection.
Fig. 4
Validation of biomarkers for the synovial fluid from OA and control groups. (
A
) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for the synovial fluid of MMP3, DPYSL2, C3, C4B and APOM in patients with OA compared with control group. (
B
) ROC curve for the SF-exo of MMP3, DPYSL2, C3, C4B and APOM in patients with OA compared with control group. (
C
-
D
) The concentrations of C3, C4B, APOM, MMP3 and DPYSL2 in synovial fluid of OA patients and healthy controls were measured by ELISA assay. *
P
< 0.05
Correlation analysis of the expression of biomarkers and age
OA is an age-related degenerative joint disease of cartilage. We considered age as a possible confounding factor that may affect protein composition. Pearson correlation analyses were performed between five key protein factors and the age of the six samples used for proteome sequencing. The results showed that the linear correlation between C3, C4B, APOM, and MMP3 and age was not significant (Fig.
5
A-D). Only DPYSL2 had a significant linear correlation with age (
R
= 0.83,
P
= 0.041, Fig.
5
E). Meanwhile, we calculated the correlation of these key factors with disease states excluding age. The results showed that disease states were more likely to cause differences in OA proteins than age (
R
= 0.89,
P
= 0.042, Fig.
5
F). These mean that when biomarker expression is elevated, the probability of disease increases significantly. For example, individuals with low expression of C3, C4B, APOM, MMP3, and high expression of DPYSL2 in synovial fluid samples were mostly disease free. If these biomarkers showed the opposite expression pattern, the proportion of individuals with disease increased significantly. Thus, the effect of OA status on the composition of these key proteins was the dominant factor and existed independently of the age factor in the present study.
Fig. 5
Pearson correlation analysis. (
A
-
E
) Scatter plots showing Pearson correlation coefficients for biomarkers protein expression obtained by sequencing with patients’ age. (
F
) Scatter plots showing Pearson correlation coefficients between biomarker protein expression and disease state
Discussion
Exosomes derived from SF are closely associated with the pathogenesis of arthritis. Studies have shown that exosomes derived from SF mesenchymal stem cells can attenuate arthritis and bone damage in rheumatoid arthritis [
31
]. The exosomal lncRNA PCGEM1 in SF has been identified as a potential biomarker for distinguishing the early OA from advanced OA [
32
]. SF-exo from OA patients stimulated the secretion of pro-inflammatory factors from M1 macrophages [
33
]. In our study, we explored the iTRAQ proteomics of SF-exo in OA and healthy controls. A total of 432 proteins were detected, including 20 up-regulated proteins and 5 down-regulated proteins. Functional analysis indicated that DEPs were involved in immune response pathways, such as circulating immunoglobulin and antigen binding. These results suggest that SF-exo may possess potential immune regulatory capabilities.
Furthermore, we downloaded the public dataset PXD023708, which contains SF samples from OA patient and healthy controls, and then compared it with our SF-exo data. We identified five DEPs overlapped between SF and SF-exo groups. Interestingly, these five DEPs exhibited opposing expression tendency trends in the two datasets. The cause of this discrepancy may be attributed to various factors, including sample types, collection and processing techniques. In terms of the characteristics of the samples, exosomes are extracellular vesicles released when multivesicular bodies fuse with the cytoplasmic membrane, with a unique sorting mechanism that selectively encapsulates some of the proteins [
34
,
35
]. In contrast, SF is a complex mixture of molecular mixture of different types of cytokines and metabolites that reflect protein expression throughout the synovial environment [
36
]. In addition, there may be differences in the local microenvironments in which SF and exosomes are located, and these microenvironmental factors could influence protein expression and activity, leading to distinct protein expression patterns in SF-exo compared to SF [
37
]. Most existing proteomic studies of exosomes have focused on comparing exosomes from different sources or exosomes secreted under different conditions, while fewer comparative analyses have been performed between exosomes and their parent cells [
37
]. A study using proteomic analysis concluded that human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes are homogeneous and differentiated from their parental cells, suggesting that the protein composition of exosomes may undergo a specific selective packaging process to accommodate their role in intercellular communication and function [
38
]. Protein expression profiles of human and mouse cell-derived exosomes and their cells, and lung tissue-derived exosomes and their tissues, have been compared and found that some of the differential genes showed diametrically opposed in exosomes and their original sources [
39
]. Different collection methods can affect sample quality and protein content. Differences in puncture location, depth, and collection times can result in different compositions of SF. As for the SF-exo sample, the acquisition of exosomes may be affected by the sample pre-treatment conditions, e.g. centrifugation speed and time [
40
]. In this study, we found that DPYSL2 was up-regulated in SF-exo of OA patients, which was down-regulated in SF of OA patients. A previous study reported that DPYSL2 was a key regulator in promoting the differentiation of neural stem cells [
41
]. The hyperphosphorylation of DPYSL2 may induce neuronal apoptosis in the development of Alzheimer’s disease [
42
]. DPYSL2 played a role in neuronal development and polarity and was involved in axon guidance. We speculated that DPYSL2 might be involved in sensory nerve injury and the remodeling of OA. To further validate this phenomenon, we plan to conduct more experiments, such as samples from different disease stages and different sources and their parental origins, to explore the consistency and variability of these protein expression trends.
PPI analysis showed C3, C4B, and APOM formed a tightly interconnected triangular network. Notably, we found that the proteins within this network were significantly enriched in complement and coagulation cascades, antioxidant activity, and lipid transporter activity. C3 and C4B played important roles in the complement and coagulation cascades. A previous study reported that cell-intrinsic complement C3 in fibroblasts activated the inflammasome, leading to inflammatory arthritis recurrence [
43
]. APOM, a 25-kDa apolipoprotein, was closely related to the inflammatory response [
44
]. Hung et al. found that the average plasma concentration of APOM was significantly higher in patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared to controls, suggesting that APOM is associated with increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis. MMP3 has been identified as a biomarker for synovial inflammation [
45
]. ROC analysis showed that these five DEPs could effectively distinguish OA from healthy individuals. These findings suggest that these five proteins may serve as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of OA.
Age has been reported to cause a number of systemic protein changes. In previous OA studies, these changes were mainly focused on physiological processes related to aging, such as slowing down cellular metabolism, cellular senescence, stem cell depletion, and other general changes [
46
]. In this study, we correlated patient age with key biomarkers, and C3, C4B, APOM, and MMP3, except DPYSL2, were not linearly associated with age. The protein markers of our interest were mainly associated with viral infection, inflammation occurrence, cartilage degeneration, and axonal regeneration, with the results of KEGG analysis and reports [
47
–
51
]. Of the available studies on these key markers, none of them have been shown to be primarily age-driven, with the exception of the study by Mohallem et al. that found DPYSL2 to be associated with neurodegenerative diseases in the brains of aging mice [
52
]. They are more often associated with specific pathological processes such as inflammatory responses and axonal regeneration [
53
]. Furthermore, a previous study by our team analyzed the correlation between miRNAs and patient age in 75 clinical samples (33–81 years old), and did not find a significant linear correlation between the two [
54
]. These reports further support our view that for the key proteins in this study, the effect of OA status on them is largely independent of age factors.
Our research provides valuable insights, but we also acknowledge that there are certain limitations. Firstly, the sample size of patients included in the proteomics study was relatively small, and a low P-value threshold was used to identify DEPs. Secondly, further analysis for DEPs should be performed. Despite these limitations, we found the profiles of SF-exo were distinctive. Certain proteins within SF-exo have the potential to serve as effective biomarkers for differentiating OA from healthy joints. We believe that SF-exo will become an important tool for OA diagnosis and risk assessment. Moreover, the SF-exo protein signature presented in our study may serve as a springboard for future investigations about function of SF-exo in OA.
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Supplementary Material 1