Introduction
Comparing Molecular Identification Among Omics Measurements
In biomedical research, systems biology studies
1
−
3
are used to
discover new disease biomarkers and elucidate underlying biological
mechanisms. Such studies are driven by multiple high-throughput omics
technologies: genomics,
4
,
5
transcriptomics,
6
proteomics
7
,
8
and metabolomics.
9
,
10
Genomics and transcriptomics are the most mature, owing to the more
limited chemical diversity of DNA and RNA relative to proteins or
metabolites,
11
,
12
the fidelity and accuracy of
the associated measurement techniques (i.e., sequencing),
5
and the breakthrough of having a complete human
genome reference sequence as a result of the Human Genome Project.
13
Today, whole genomes can be sequenced in just
1–2 days with error rates <0.1%,
14
using modern high throughput sequencing technology (e.g., Illumina
NovaSeq) and exploiting the fidelity of DNA polymerase for molecular
replication and the specificity of fluorophores read from labeled
base pairs.
5
Proteomics is next in
technical maturity. This is because proteins have only slightly greater
chemical diversity compared to DNA and RNA, as they are composed of
22 amino acids. However, the complexity of the proteome can increase
greatly if all possible protein post-translational modifications (PTMs;
e.g. phosphorylation) are considered, and the computational time required
for processing mass spectrometry-based proteomics data scales exponentially
with the number of PTMs considered. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics
7
,
8
exploits several characteristics of proteins and their constituent
peptides. First, proteins are direct readouts of the genetic code,
and if the genome is known, then associated protein sequences can
be determined.
15
Second, peptides dissociate
characteristically around the amide bond during a tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) measurement, allowing for accurate prediction of their fragmentation
spectra.
16
,
17
These characteristics have led to analytical
workflows that can determine the proteomes of moderately complex samples,
as well as methods for estimating and controlling peptide and protein
identification false discovery rates (FDRs).
18
,
19
Completely measuring the proteomes of highly complex samples (e.g.,
human blood plasma) requires a balancing of time and cost. In addition,
comprehensive determination of post-translationally modified proteins
20
and hybrid peptides
21
remains challenging.
Metabolomics is the least mature among
the omics sciences, with
high-throughput, untargeted measurements having the goal of identifying
and quantifying as many nonprotein, small molecules (e.g., 50–1500
Da) as possible. Given their high sensitivity and broad molecular
coverage, a variety of mass spectrometry-based techniques, such as
gas and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS and
LC-MS), are used in untargeted metabolomics. Typically, LC-MS assays
yield thousands of features that each represent a potential small
molecule of interest. However, these features may also be due to chemical
noise or contamination and chemical variants of small molecules such
as protonated- or sodiated-adducts. A significant challenge in untargeted
metabolomics is discerning among these signals to annotate the chemical
structures associated with the detected features. The current paradigm
for confident metabolite identification involves comparing experimental
MS (or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NMR) data from biological
measurements to comparable data in reference libraries that were populated
from purified reference metabolites that were measured under similar
conditions, preferably in the same laboratory. Unlike proteomics,
where the analytes of interest are encoded by the genome and limited
to linear polymers of repeating amino acids, the chemical space being
profiled in metabolomics is essentially unconstrained, especially
if exogenous metabolites (such as food products), microbial transformations
and other chemical exposures are considered. As a result, much less
is known about the complete composition of the human metabolome than
the genome or the proteome. This is because relatively few reference
standards are available relative to the known chemical space, and
the measured properties such as mass fragmentation patterns are less
predictable for metabolites than peptides. Consequently, metabolite
identification in metabolomics is often prone to more errors or uncertainties
than other omics technologies. Even if we could computationally predict
all metabolites likely to exist in a given organism or biofluid, based
on genomes or proteomes, the search would not be complete due to interaction
of the organism with nonbiological sources. As a result, even though
metabolomics reference libraries continue to grow,
22
,
23
they are unlikely to ever be complete. This has inspired efforts
to increase reference data through enzymatic biotransformation of
drugs and other xenobiotic chemicals.
24
Current Landscape and Use of Reference Libraries for Compound
Identification
Reference libraries contain varying levels
of curated information about compounds (e.g., structure, properties,
and classifications). At a minimum, useful reference libraries contain
compound structures in machine readable formats or public identifiers
that map to chemical structures, alongside derived properties such
as molecular formulas and exact monoisotopic masses. In particular,
many reference libraries developed for use with specific analytical
approaches contain measurable observables, such as observed precursor
ions and MS/MS or NMR spectra. They also include experimental metadata
that define these spectra, such as the type of instrument used or
e.g., details of the MS/MS fragmentation method that was applied.
For the case of high-resolution MS (HRMS), the data can be used to
directly search against exact masses of known, expected, and even
predicted chemical structures. If HRMS data accuracy of <0.002
Da is achieved, molecular formulas can be inferred using a variety
of different software tools, especially if MS/MS and isotope ratio
information is included.
25
−
29
Many open-access reference libraries exist in the form of
compound collections that contain mass, formula and structure information
for millions of known or predicted compounds (
Table
1
). These include PubChem
30
which has nearly 119 million compounds, ChEMBL
31
with 2.1 million compounds, and the US-EPA CompTox
Chemicals Dashboard
32
with 1.2 million
compounds. All of these support mass and formula searching. However,
they also include a large fraction of anthropogenic molecules, making
these libraries somewhat more suited for exposomics
33
or environmental studies and less suitable for metabolomics
studies that focus on physiological metabolites. A number of reference
libraries exist that focus on storing only known biologically related
compounds. For example, the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) now accounts
for 248,097 compounds,
34
Lipid Maps
35
lists 45,684 compounds, KEGG
36
denotes 18,784 compounds, and MetaCyc
37
includes 16,861 compounds. Many of these databases continue
to expand in coverage and content and such databases are much more
suitable for traditional metabolomics studies.
Table 1
Representative Compound Collection
Reference Libraries
a
library
number
of compounds
URL
citation
ChemSpider
>129,000,000
http://www.chemspider.com/
(
38
)
PubChem
>119,000,000
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
(
39
)
CompTox Chemicals Dashboard
>1,200,000
https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/
(
32
)
RaMP-DB 2.0
>256,000
https://rampdb.nih.gov/
(
40
)
Human Metabolome Database (HMDB)
>248,000
https://hmdb.ca/
(
34
)
Metabolomics Workbench
>164,000
https://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org/
(
41
)
Chemical Entities of Biological Interest
(ChEBI)
>160,000
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/
(
42
)
LipidMaps
>45,000
https://www.lipidmaps.org/databases/lmsd/overview
(
35
)
Natural Products Atlas
>33,000
https://www.npatlas.org/
(
43
)
MetaboLights
>27,000
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/index
(
44
)
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG)
>19,000
https://www.genome.jp/kegg/
(
36
)
MetaCyc
>16,000
https://metacyc.org/
(
37
)
a
These representative reference
libraries function primarily as collections of compounds and include
chemical structures, molecular formulae, masses and physicochemical
properties, among other data.
While
m
/
z
or formula
searching
is relatively easy to perform, and the sizes of the reference libraries
mentioned above are often very large, the reliability of these single
parameter matches is often quite poor. Indeed, it is often possible
to get hundreds of potential matches with a single
m
/
z
, or even formula, query.
45
,
46
Additional “observable” information is needed to add
specificity and increase confidence in tentative compound identifications.
47
,
48
Generally, the most accessible and reproducible experimental measurements,
beyond mass, are spectral or separations data. This includes MS/MS
spectra (for LC-MS or CE-MS), electron ionization (EI) spectra (for
GC-MS) or NMR spectra, and retention times (RT; for LC) or retention
indices (RI; for GC) and drift times or collision cross sections (CCS)
for ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) data. More recent technology developments
allow for the collection of infrared spectra in-line with IMS and
MS measurements.
49
The intensity, position,
number and character of the peaks seen in MS/MS or NMR spectra is
often considered sufficient to make identifications of metabolites;
however, MS/MS spectral match alone is insufficient for providing
unambiguous matching of metabolites when using large reference libraries.
Several different scoring schemes are available to facilitate spectral
matching and scoring and offer superior results to simply matching
based on a mass or formula.
50
−
52
The chromatographic and separation
parameters are related to physicochemical properties (e.g., size,
shape, charge, boiling point, hydrophobicity) and provide information
that is fundamentally different from measured mass or fragmentation
spectra. RI and CCS values can be relatively instrument- or condition-independent
with proper calibration, making them highly reproducible and suitable
for compound identification. CCS values are particularly reproducible,
with relative standard deviations <1% reported in interlaboratory
comparisons and under standardized conditions.
53
Fragmentation spectra (from GC-MS or LC-MS/MS) are generally
relied upon the most in identification workflows due to their specificity
and wide availability of associated instrumentation. GC-electron ionization
mass spectra were standardized over 60 years ago. Yet, in comparison,
measured spectra from LC-MS/MS are harder to standardize due to the
variability between instruments, the fragmentation conditions and
the collision energies used. Therefore, MS/MS libraries often contain
multiple spectra for each compound.
Because of their utility
in providing additional confidence in
metabolite identification, there are a growing number of both commercial
and open-access reference libraries that contain various properties
from experimental measurements of pure reference compounds and that
are available for matching to metabolomics data. Representative reference
libraries that contain mass spectral data are MassBank.eu, MassBank
of North America (MassBank.us), the NIST spectral library,
51
METLIN,
22
and mzCloud.
Other resources exist that contain both spectra from analysis of pure
compounds but also large numbers of spectra of unknown compounds from
analysis of real samples, such as GNPS.
54
Some of the more popular NMR spectral libraries are the BioMagResBank,
55
NMRShiftDB,
56
NP-MRD,
57
and COLMAR,
58
as
well as commercial libraries produced by Bruker and Chenomx. Representative
reference libraries that contain RI and/or CCS include: the NIST RI
library, the FiehnLib RI library,
59
the
Unified CCS Compendium,
60
the Sumner CCS
library
61
and several commercial CCS libraries
from instrument vendors such as Bruker, Agilent and Waters. MassBank.us
contains many metabolites with LC-based retention times, including
for hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC).
62
In contrast to standardized gas chromatography RI and CCS
measurements, LC RT and electrophoretic mobilities are not easily
translated from instrument to instrument or from one configuration
to another. As a result, reference libraries for LC RT and electrophoretic
mobility are often quite small. Recently, however, the developers
of METLIN released a reference library containing >80,000 RTs measured
for small molecules, called SMRT.
63
These
data, the largest of their kind, were collected using a single standard
chromatographic protocol but have not been validated yet by independent
means. A more detailed listing of reference libraries focused on housing
data from analyses of pure reference compounds, their contents, and
the number of entries found is provided in
Table
2
.
Table 2
Representative Reference Libraries
of Observable Data
a
library
number of compounds
number of experimental reference values
URL
citation
Metlin
>860,000
5 million spectra
https://metlin.scripps.edu/
(
64
)
NIST2023 EI-MS library
>347,000
>394,000 spectra
https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist23-updates-nist-tandem-and-electron-ionization-spectral-libraries
N/A
NIST2023 RI library
>180,000
>491,000 retention indices
https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist23-updates-nist-tandem-and-electron-ionization-spectral-libraries
N/A
NIST2023 Tandem MS library
>51,000
>2.4 million spectra
https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist23-updates-nist-tandem-and-electron-ionization-spectral-libraries
N/A
MassBank of North America (MoNA)
>227,000
>197,000 spectra
https://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/
N/A
mzCloud
>21,000
>10.7 million
spectra
https://www.mzcloud.org/
N/A
MassBank Europe
>15,000
>90,000
spectra
https://massbank.eu/MassBank/
N/A
Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank (BMRB)
>1,300
>10 million chemical shifts
https://bmrb.io/
(
55
)
NMRShiftDB
>40,000
>68,000
spectra
https://nmrshiftdb.nmr.uni-koeln.de/
(
56
)
Natural Product Magnetic Resonance Database (NP-MRD)
>87,000
>1500 spectra
https://np-mrd.org/
(
57
)
FiehnLib RI library
>1200
>1200
retention indices
https://fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/projects/fiehnlib
(
59
)
AllCCS
>2100
>3500 CCS
http://allccs.zhulab.cn/
(
65
)
Unified Collision Cross Section Compendium
>1700
>3700 CCS
https://mcleanresearchgroup.shinyapps.io/CCS-Compendium/
(
60
)
a
These representative reference
libraries contain listings of compounds and their observable data,
such as mass spectra, retention indices, NMR spectra. and CCS values.
Recent Advances in
In Silico
Tools for Expanding
Reference Libraries
As can be seen from
Table
2
, measured observable data are
very limited compared to the number of structures we know or suspect
to exist. While many reference libraries containing experimentally
determined values exist, most are currently too small or too incomplete
to satisfy the needs of metabolomics studies. The most comprehensive
untargeted MS-based metabolomics experiments that rely on today’s
reference libraries can identify up to 10% of the observed features.
66
However, such ratios depend on the type of data
processing and assay: for GC-MS based metabolomics or in lipidomics
assays, the ratio of identification is typically at 30% of features
that have associated mass spectra.
67
In
fact, high quality data processing should include measures of blank
sample corrections, adduct deconvolution and the use of pooled sample
quality controls to reduce the number of spurious features in assessments
of metabolome coverage statements.
One route for increasing
the amount of observable data in reference libraries is through the
synthesis or isolation of molecules of interest. However, if one assumes
that the total number of all known and predicted metabolites, as well
as all known anthropogenic chemicals, found in humans is ∼2
million compounds and the cost to isolate or synthesize and to comprehensively
characterize these compounds is ∼ $5000/chemical, such an effort
would cost in excess of $10 billion USD. This initiative would easily
take 20+ years and consume a significant portion of the NSF or NIH
budget. In other words, the time and cost to make the comprehensive
reference library required for the metabolomics community is simply
not feasible. A more cost-effective approach will have to be developed.
We believe that a viable option, and the future of reference library
growth, is via
in silico
approaches. Simply stated,
computational approaches could be used to generate
in silico
(i.e., predicted) observable data, based on validated methods. We
propose this because of the foundational developments in chemistry
and physics and the need to identify a vast number of unidentified
features. Development of various machine learning- or quantum chemistry-based
approaches (reviewed in ref (
68
)) and tools for
in silico
prediction of
various types of spectra and other observables has increased the size
and chemical appropriateness of existing reference libraries. Indeed,
there are now several well-developed software tools for predicting
electron ionization-mass spectrometry (EI-MS), electrospray ionization-tandem
mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) and NMR spectra, CCS, and RT values
using combinatorial approaches, machine and deep learning methods,
and quantum mechanical techniques. For example, for ESI-MS/MS spectral
prediction, several machine learning methods including MetFrag,
69
CFM-ID,
70
MS-FINDER,
71
ChemDistiller,
72
and
MAGMa
73
have appeared. CFM-ID, MS-FINDER
and MAGMa in particular have shown excellent performance in terms
of spectral prediction accuracy in multiple independent tests.
74
,
75
For EI-MS spectra, two machine learning methods (CFM-ID-EI
76
and NEIMS
77
) have
been described and both perform well. Separately, a quantum mechanical
method called QCEIMS
78
has been developed
to predict EI-MS spectra and more recently ESI-MS/MS spectra with
QCxMS.
79
QCEIMS and QCxMS are significantly
slower than the ML methods, but they provide useful insights into
the EI and ESI fragmentation processes. We describe advances in predicting
NMR spectra, CCS and RT values, and novel metabolite structures (e.g.,
through biotransformation predictions) in the
Supporting Information
.
Placing Confidence in Metabolomics Identifications
Insufficient knowledge of, or constraints placed upon, which small
molecules might be present in a sample creates unique challenges when
attempting to identify the chemical structure associated with a feature
detected in metabolomics analyses. Even with the most recent developments
in software and innovative computational methods that can automate
steps in the informatics workflow,
80
,
81
a critical
question is the level of confidence that one has in the identifications
proposed. Features detected in untargeted metabolomics analyses are
typically identified based on the extent to which their experimental
data matches to reference data. In addition to accurate mass (monoisotopic
m
/
z
) data and MS/MS spectra obtained from
a MS measurement, complementary data from additional analytical measurements
(e.g., RT, CCS, NMR spectra, different ionization modes or chemical
derivatizations) improve identification confidence by limiting the
number of potential compounds that satisfy the given match criteria.
47
However, currently there are very few methods
for quantifying the ambiguity in a metabolite identification in context
of the chemical space being considered, and particularly when extending
beyond just MS/MS spectral match. Accurately estimating total FDR
in compound identifications is still in its infancy in metabolomics.
52
,
82
,
83
In 2005, a Metabolomics
Standards Workshop
84
was convened by the
U.S. National Institutes of Health and the Metabolomics Society with
the goal of establishing a Metabolomics Standards Initiative (MSI)
85
that would consider and recommend minimum reporting
standards for describing various aspects of metabolomics experiments.
The MSI consisted of five working groups comprised of international
experts in metabolomics research and that developed recommended requirements
for biological context, chemical analysis, data processing, ontology,
and data exchange associated with metabolomics studies. In 2007, the
Chemical Analysis Working Group of the MSI published the seminal paper
on the minimum information for reporting the chemical analysis metadata
associated with a metabolomics study, including a 4-level, qualitative
scheme for reporting metabolite identification confidence.
47
These MSI-levels have been revised to include
additional considerations,
48
or other data
types,
86
and focus on specific classes
of molecules,
87
but have remained largely
unchanged. In 2014, Sumner et al.
88
and
Creek et al.
89
proposed a transition from
the existing qualitative metabolite identification confidence levels
to a quantitative scoring system based on identification points (IP),
citing the bias of the traditional identification confidence levels
toward identifications made in the context of data from authentic
reference compounds or the need for more granularity in the levels,
respectively. Most recently, Alygizakis and colleagues used a machine
learning approach to develop a new IP-based system.
90
Reporting qualitative confidence levels in metabolite
identifications
is infrequently and inconsistently used by members of the metabolomics
community. This is likely because assigning confidence scores is still
a subjective process for most data reporters. Recipients of such data
reports lack sufficient information or tools to independently verify
metabolite identifications. Many reports include only chemical names,
but not chemical or structure identifiers like PubChem Compound Identifiers
(PubChem CIDs), Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI),
or International Chemical Identifiers (InChIs).
91
Chemical names can be highly ambiguous and misleading for
data consumers and easily lead to problems in comparing data across
different biological studies, as recently highlighted by arguments
in the lipidomics literature.
92
For scientists
who process LC-MS/MS data, deciding whether a given experimental MS/MS
spectrum matches a reference spectrum is dependent on the metric used,
the threshold set, and many other ambiguous decision points.
52
The current best alternative to confidence levels
is to provide both raw and processed data in public repositories such
as the Metabolomics Workbench
41
and MetaboLights
44
to support claims of reported metabolite identifications
and to allow for independent verification.
Expanding from Measures of Confidence to Measures of Ambiguity
For both qualitative levels of metabolite identification confidence
47
,
48
,
86
and quantitative scoring systems,
88
,
89
the methods are not easily transferable between analytical platforms
(e.g., MS and NMR) and the degree of ambiguity or uncertainty in identifications
is not fully represented. That is, given a reference library of a
certain size and composition, and an analytical approach of certain
resolution and precision, what is the likelihood of one identification
being more correct than another given the available evidence? Here,
we introduce a concept for moving from levels of identification confidence
or cumulative point scoring systems to a universal method that assigns
a mathematical probability to a given identification being correct.
Importantly, this concept considers the composition and size of the
reference library used, the numbers and types of measurement dimensions
included in the experimental analysis, and each measurement’s
precision. It is also easily automated and the concept transferable
between analytical platforms.
Introduction to Metabolite Identification Probability
In this section, we introduce the concept of metabolite identification
probability and evaluate its implementation using a randomly chosen
subset of the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB).
34
The subset was classified into a chemical ontology using
the ClassyFire tool,
93
and 27,359 compounds
with an invalid chemical classification value (“NA”)
were excluded, resulting in a nonlipids subset and a lipids subset
consisting of 22,077 and 44,537 molecules, respectively (
Supplemental Table S1
). For each molecule, the
protonated mass was calculated from the protonated molecular formula,
CCS values were predicted using CCSbase,
94
RTs were predicted using Retip
62
under
hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) conditions for
nonlipid molecules or reversed-phase chromatography conditions for
lipid molecules, and MS/MS spectra were predicted using CFM-ID 4.0
95
at a “medium” collision energy
level of 20 eV. The nonlipid and lipid molecule subsets were placed
in separate matrices, together with their protonated mass (
m
/
z
), RT, CCS, and MS/MS spectra for each
molecule.
Logic Supporting the Concept
Metabolite identification
probability represents a first step in moving away from assigning
levels of identification confidence or IP-based methods toward a universal,
automated method. Importantly, while methods for estimating FDRs for
nonpeptide small molecules have been explored in the context of MS/MS
spectral matching, these have not been extended to other technologies
(e.g., NMR) and data types (e.g., retention times, CCS values). The
identification probability concept that we introduce here can be applied
to any metabolomics measurement technology or method that relies on
reference libraries (e.g., MS, GC-MS, LC-MS, LC-IMS, LC-IMS-MS, LC-IMS-MS/MS,
NMR, LC-NMR, etc.). Identification probability is defined as follows:
where
N
is the number of
molecules in a reference library that match an experimentally measured
feature within the precision(s) of the given measurement technology
or method and the user-defined tolerances allowed in the measurement
precision(s)
Higher dimensional analytical approaches or those
that provide measurements of more properties should provide higher
probability in a compound identification due to their ability to provide
higher resolution of chemical space, while larger reference libraries
would make it more difficult to completely resolve molecules in chemical
space due to higher potential for conflicts.
Let us consider
a single dimension or single property analysis
to start. MS when used alone produces mass spectra, and the spectra
will have a given resolution, based on the type of mass spectrometer
used. Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR)-MS provides
the highest mass resolution among current mass spectrometers used
for metabolomics and related studies and can lead to extremely high
accuracy in determining the exact molecular formulas that correspond
to detected isotope patterns in the mass spectrum. The determined
molecular formulas can then be searched against an appropriate reference
library consisting of known molecular formulas; in our example, we
consider a subset of the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB)
34
consisting of 22,077 nonlipid molecules for
which computationally predicted reference data were generated (
Supplemental Table S1
). If one were to perform
a metabolomics experiment and detect a feature with protonated exact
mass equal to 116.07115 Da, then the calculated molecular formula
would be C
5
H
9
NO
2
, which
may
correspond to the target molecule 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic
acid. When that formula is searched against the HMDB library subset,
we find that there are 9 compounds with the same formula; the probability
of the experimentally measured formula C
5
H
9
NO
2
actually being 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic acid (or any of
the 9 candidates) is thus 1/9 or 11% (
Figure
1
). Now, let us consider a multidimensional
analysis, such as IMS-MS/MS. From this analysis, we would determine
an IMS drift time or CCS value, a MS/MS spectrum and an accurate mass.
The individual measurement precisions of any of these dimensions is
not sufficiently high as to allow exact determination of any given
property, and so matching of experimental data to the library proceeds
within ranges or tolerances determined by typical experimental precision:
± 5 ppm for mass, ± 1% for CCS, and ≥850 for cosine
similarity score (for MS/MS spectral matching). In the example shown
in
Figure
1
for the
target molecule 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic acid, the combination
of ±5 ppm and ±1% CCS reduces the candidates in the reference
library to 7, and the identification probability for all candidates
is 1/7 or 14%. For the same example, the combination of ±5 ppm,
± 1% CCS, and ≥850 cosine similarity score reduces the
candidates in the reference library to 1, and the identification probability
is 1/1 or 100% for the measured feature corresponding to the target
molecule 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic acid. A key advantage to higher
dimensional analysis is that the likelihood in complete overlap among
property sets for library entries can decrease as dimensionality of
the analysis is increased.
Figure 1
Demonstration of the metabolite identification
probability concept
using 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic acid as the target molecule. Conventional
metabolite identification (left panel) is based on manual or semiautomated
comparison of experimental data to similar data contained in reference
libraries, with final identification confidence determined by a data
analyst. Probability-based identification (right panel) is similarly
based on comparison of experimental and reference library data and
is automatable. Identification probability is defined as 1/
N
, where
N
is the number of molecules in
the reference library that match an experimentally measured feature
within the precision(s) of the given measurement technology or method
and the user-defined tolerances allowed in the measurement precision(s).
In the examples shown, the target molecule is 4-amino-2-methylenebutanoic
acid, and the reference library is a subset of HMDB consisting of
22,007 nonlipid molecules. In the top row, identification is based
on a single dimension of analysis, formula match (1). In the middle
row, identification is based on the combination of ±5 ppm and
±1% CCS matching (2). In the bottom row, identification is based
on the combination of ±5 ppm, ± 1% CCS, and ≥850
cosine similarity score match (3).
Impacts of Reference Library Size, Property Match Tolerances,
and Analysis Dimensionality
To evaluate how library size,
property match tolerances, and dimensionality of analytical analysis
might impact metabolite identification probabilities, we further explored
the 22,077 nonlipid molecules from HMDB, as well as the complementary
set of 44,537 lipid molecules (
Supplemental Table S2
), from the same source, by matching each of the two molecule
sets and their calculated/predicted properties to themselves.
Impact of Reference Library Size
To evaluate the impact
of reference library size on metabolite identification probability,
we performed Monte Carlo simulations to randomly draw smaller library
subsets (e.g., 1,000, 5,000, or 10,000 molecules) from the full lipids
and nonlipids libraries. We evaluated 100 randomly drawn subsets for
each library size, matched each subset to itself by mass (±5
ppm), aggregated results, and compared the number of matches returned
per database search (
Figure
2
). Our results demonstrate that as the size of the library
increases, the relative proportion of matches at a given probability
decreases; thus, smaller reference libraries will tend to yield artificially
high identification probabilities. Comparing lipids vs nonlipids,
the impact of reference library size on identification probability
is more pronounced for libraries with more heterogeneous content.
Figure 2
Impact
of reference library size on metabolite identification probability.
Monte Carlo simulations were performed to randomly draw subsets of
the full lipids (left panel) and nonlipids (right panel) reference
libraries of size 1K, 5K, and 10K. Match probability is shown on the
x
-axis, and the proportion of compounds in each data set
matched within ±5 ppm and with a given probability is shown on
the
y
-axis. For example, for nonlipids, a little
over 40% of compounds are matched with an identification probability
of 100% when matching the full library to itself with a mass tolerance
of ±5 ppm. Solid lines indicate the mean value, and shaded regions
indicate ±1 standard deviation from the mean based on 100 Monte
Carlo simulations (note that no shaded region exists for the full
data set, for which random subsets were not drawn).
Impact of Property Match Tolerances and Dimensionality of Experimental
Analysis
We next evaluated the impacts of individual property
match tolerances and the dimensionality of the experimental analysis
on metabolite identification probability, selecting a range of property
match tolerances as might be encountered with a variety of instrumentation
(e.g., FTICR vs time-of-flight for mass accuracy). Overall, varying
property match tolerance has different impacts on the number of matches
with 100% probability depending on the property considered. For instance,
the evaluated
m
/
z
match thresholds
gave rise to little, if any, change in the proportion of matches with
100% probability from both the lipids and nonlipids data sets, either
alone or in combination with other properties (
Figure
3
). We hypothesize that the low variance in match performance
across
m
/
z
tolerances can be attributed
to the relative density of compounds occupying
m
/
z
space vs the variability of the error thresholds in practical
terms. For instance, at an
m
/
z
of
800 Da (close to the median
m
/
z
for
lipids of 821.8 Da), the error thresholds of ±0.1, 1, and 5 ppm
correspond to ±0.00008 Da, ± 0.0008 Da, and ±0.004
Da, respectively. The resolutions may not differ sufficiently to change
the number of matches within each corresponding tolerance significantly.
Figure 3
Impact
of property match tolerances and dimensionality of experimental
analysis on metabolite identification probability for lipids (left)
and nonlipids (right). Each boxplot summarizes the fraction of each
database that is matched with 100% probability (
k
= 1) when varying the search tolerances evaluated in each dimension
(
m
/
z
, CCS, RT, and MS/MS, respectively)
as shown. The first set of boxplots in each plot represent results
when only considering the dimension of interest and varying search
tolerance within that single dimension, with the subsequent boxplots
depicting results upon inclusion of additional search dimensions but
only varying the search tolerance of the first dimension. For each
dimension, search tolerances include
m
/
z
± 0.1 ppm, ± 1 ppm, and ±5 ppm; CCS ± 0.1%,
± 1%, and ±3%; RT ± 0.1 min, and ±0.5 min; and
MS/MS cosine score ≥750, ≥ 850, and ≥950.
In contrast to
m
/
z
, CCS search
tolerance has a more pronounced impact on the number of matches with
100% probability. While searching by CCS alone produces zero or near-zero
matches with 100% probability across both lipids and nonlipids data
sets, when used in combination with other analytical dimensions, the
effect of CCS search tolerance becomes much more pronounced. In some
cases, we observe a 2-fold or even greater increase in the fraction
of the data set which can be definitively matched, particularly in
the case of lipids (
Figure
3
). Our simulation data suggests that when used in conjunction
with other measurements, accurate CCS measurements have the potential
to increase the number of confident identifications. However, we note
that the highest-accuracy CCS error threshold evaluated is a CCS error
of ±0.1%, which may be achievable experimentally only using very
high-resolution ion mobility separations, such as structures for lossless
ion manipulations (SLIM).
98
Inclusion of
CCS in compound matching at this tighter threshold produced marked
improvements in the proportion of matches with 100% probability.
Neither of the two RT thresholds evaluated (±0.1 min and ±0.5
min) produced any matches in the database with 100% probability using
RT alone for the lipids or nonlipids data sets (data not shown). However,
as with CCS, RT combined with additional measurement dimensions produced
more confident matches (
Figure
3
). Reducing the RT tolerance from 0.5 to 0.1 min correspondingly
increases the proportion of matches with 100% probability. While the
observed effect is smaller than the impact of CCS, the inclusion of
RT still substantially improves matches with 100% probability, especially
compared with
m
/
z
.
Finally,
we evaluated the impact of the MS/MS spectral match threshold.
We chose to use cosine similarity score due to its ubiquitous use;
however, we note that alternative scoring algorithms, such as spectral
entropy,
52
have demonstrated improvements
over cosine similarity. Based on the range of typical scoring thresholds
used for MS/MS matching, we evaluated cosine similarity thresholds
of 750, 850, and 950. Our results show that among both lipids and
nonlipids, MS/MS score alone is the best-performing singular measurement
in terms of matching compounds with 100% probability (
Figure
3
). In contrast to
m
/
z
, however, increasing the MS/MS cosine score threshold
resulted in significant increases to the proportion of compounds matched
with 100% probability in both the lipids and nonlipids libraries.
In fact, when matching by MS/MS cosine score alone, 63% of nonlipids
can be accurately matched with a cosine similarity score of ≥950,
compared to just 24% with a cosine score of 750. As before, the MS/MS
dimension can be combined with other measurement dimensions to achieve
an even greater fraction of compounds matched with 100% probability;
in fact, all the best-performing multidimensional search parameter
sets include MS/MS.
While the example data and metabolite identification
probability
analyses discussed above are LC-MS-centric, the concept is applicable
for any workflow that produces metabolite identifications through
matching experimental data to similar data in reference libraries,
such as NMR and GC-MS. Indeed, many NMR spectral matching algorithms,
such as those used in MagMet,
99
Bayesil
100
and Chenomx,
101
use
concepts similar to the cosine similarity score used in MS/MS. Likewise,
GC-MS uses equivalent concepts as LC-MS/MS for spectral matching.
Guidelines for Appropriate Reference Library Size and Composition
Both the size and composition of reference libraries will impact
the assessment of metabolite identification probability. A reference
library that is too small can result in reduced identification error
rate and seemingly accurate, and thus overly confident, identification
probabilities. One that is too large can result in increased identification
error rate due to the addition of compounds that are highly unlikely
to be found in such a sample and reduced identification probabilities.
82
Similarly, one should select the appropriate
source of compounds to include in the reference library for a given
sample type and use case. For example, if a study focuses on a specific
organism in a laboratory-controlled setting, then only those molecules
potentially produced or consumed by the organism, present in growth
media, for example, or known as common contaminants present in the
chosen analytical method should be included in the reference library.
That is, to prevent misidentifications, one should use organism-specific
or sample-specific reference libraries of appropriate size and composition.
By comparison, the proteomics community typically uses an appropriate
protein FASTA file containing the amino acid sequences of all proteins
expected in the organism(s) under study and that are based on translations
of the corresponding genomes when searching peptide MS/MS spectra.
More detailed guidelines for appropriate reference library size and
composition are discussed in the
Supporting Information
.
Conclusions and Recommendations for Future Implementation of
Metabolite Identification Probability
In this perspective,
we have introduced a new concept of metabolite
identification probability and have demonstrated its utility in mock
identifications using reference libraries constructed from subsets
of HMDB and computationally generated RT, CCS,
m
/
z
, and MS/MS data. The method is computationally simple,
automatable, and transferable among analytical platforms. It requires
only processed metabolomics data, appropriately defined tolerances
allowed in the associated measurement precisions, and reference libraries
that are comprehensive and appropriate for the system being queried.
We recommend that the metabolomics and related communities (e.g.,
the nontarget analysis community) join us in further exploring the
metabolite identification probability approach to more fully reveal
its potential and limitations, using real data from real studies and
in parallel with their current preferred methods for assessing metabolite
identification confidence (e.g., MSI levels), in order to accumulate
data on method performance relevant to state-of-the-art. Further extension
of these concepts to unidentified features will be required to fully
address e.g., unknown chemical hazards of the exposome.
33
,
102
Metabolite identification probability is heavily dependent
on the
richness of the experimental data being matched to the reference library,
the dimensionality and therefore overall resolution of the analytical
measurement, the overall measurement precision(s), and the composition
and size of the reference library itself. A key requirement for successful
implementation of the metabolite identification probability concept
is thus the availability of comprehensive and system-appropriate reference
libraries. Further research and discussion within the community are
needed to determine the repertoire of metabolites and related molecules
that should comprise a reference library for a given system, such
that metabolite identification probabilities are neither over- nor
underestimated. Related, because of the limitation of commercial availability
of reference compounds for all system-relevant small molecules, we
recommend that the community begin adopting computational approaches
for calculating or predicting the associated observable properties,
such as spectra, such that reference libraries can be made complete.
The accuracy of computationally predicted data should improve with
time as methods and technology improve.
Finally, in order that
reported metabolite identification probabilities
can be transparent, we recommend that individual laboratories version
their in-house reference libraries and make them available to the
rest of the community as e.g., open mass spectral libraries (OMSL).
Besides increasing transparency in calculations of identification
probabilities, versioned OMSL and other libraries will be a tremendous
resource to the metabolomics research community, as has already been
demonstrated by resources such as GNPS
54
and enabled through workflows such as FragHub.
103
As inspiration for how such sharing might be implemented,
the metabolomics community can look to the Universal Protein Knowledgebase
(UniProtKB)
104
as an example. UniProtKB
is a freely accessible database of curated protein sequences that
are used, among other purposes, as “reference libraries”
for proteomics data searches.