Introduction
Metabolomics is an expanding field of
functional genomics research
1
involving
the targeted and untargeted analysis
of metabolites for biomarker discovery as required for new insights
into disease mechanisms.
2
,
3
However, given the chemical
diversity of the human metabolome that includes lifelong environmental
exposures
4
and host-microbiome interactions,
5
orthogonal separation techniques are often coupled
to high resolution mass spectrometry (MS) to improve the resolution
of metabolites and their isomers/isobars.
6
Separations based on chromatography, electrophoresis, and/or ion
mobility also allow for more confident metabolite annotation
7
and complement tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)
for compound identification based on their characteristic migration/retention
times and collision cross-section areas.
8
Also, optimized separation methods enable better quantification
of metabolites in complex biological samples when using electrospray
ionization (ESI)
9
due to matrix-induced
ion suppression or enhancement effects.
10
Reversed-phase-liquid chromatography (LC)-MS is the most widely
used separation platform in metabolomics given its excellent selectivity
and broad applicability to resolve semipolar to nonpolar compounds
with established guidelines for best practices.
11
Other chromatographic separation mechanisms are better
suited for the resolution of hydrophilic/ionic metabolites, including
ion pair reversed-phase LC-MS,
12
ion-exchange
LC-MS,
13
or hydrophilic interaction chromatography-MS.
14
Nevertheless, method standardization is challenging
given a plethora of LC-MS protocols that differ in column dimensions,
stationary phases, elution conditions, and column manufacturing processes
that impact solute retention.
15
Also, sample
throughput is often constrained in LC-MS using gradient elution programs
in metabolomics when analyzing one sample per analytical run.
16
Capillary electrophoresis (CE)-MS is a
high efficiency microseparation
technique that is optimal for characterizing the ionic metabolome
from volume or mass-limited biospecimens,
17
such as infant sweat samples.
18
Moreover,
sample throughput can be increased by over an order of magnitude when
using multisegment injection (MSI)-CE-MS via a serial sample injection
format, where electrophoretic separations take place using an isocratic
background electrolyte (BGE) prior to steady-state ionization with
a coaxial sheath liquid interface.
19
,
20
For instance,
a sample throughput of 1.0 min/sample was reported by Igarashi et
al.
21
when using MSI-CE-MS for the targeted
analysis of salivary polyamines, which can also be applied to improve
peptide identification rates in bottom-up proteomics.
22
Multiplexed electrophoretic separations by MSI-CE-MS also
enable stringent quality control (QC), effective batch correction,
and versatile data workflows as needed for reliable metabolite annotation
and biomarker discovery in large-scale metabolomic studies.
23
Despite recent progress in method standardization
of CE-MS protocols,
24
ongoing concerns
related to poor method robustness and migration time variability have
hampered its wider adaptation.
25
Indeed,
nonlinear changes in the electroosmotic flow (EOF) when using bare
fused-silica capillaries contribute to large variations in absolute
migration times (MTs) than retention times (RTs) in pressure-driven
LC-MS methods due to several factors, including matrix ion adsorption
onto the capillary surface, suction effects from the nebulizer in
the sprayer, and/or temperature fluctuations in nonthermostatic regions
of the capillary.
26
,
27
Overall, large MT fluctuations
greatly complicate peak alignment, molecular feature annotation and
metabolite identification in CE-MS since data preprocessing is one
of the most time-consuming and error prone step in metabolomics that
is also difficult to scale.
28
,
29
These challenges have
sparked the development of customized tools to better align long-term
drifts in MTs between runs, such as MasterHands, a proprietary software
for data preprocessing of CE-MS metabolomic experiments that relies
on a dynamic time warping algorithm.
30
However,
limitations of this strategy include lack of empirical validation,
long processing times due to algorithm complexity, and inaccurate
results due to underlying model assumptions.
31
Other software tools for transforming CE-MS metabolomic data sets
into “mobilograms” have been proposed by Gonzalez-Ruiz
et al.
32
,
33
and later adapted by Salzer et al.
34
to improve peak annotation and metabolite identification.
35
Although effective mobility-scale transformations
in CE may improve molecular feature annotation, it also distorts original
time-domain peak shapes that can impact metabolite quantification
without appropriate corrections.
33
Moreover,
current software tools in metabolomics
36
are not fit for purpose in MSI-CE-MS as it requires both accurate
peak annotation and sample position assignment, which is difficult
to achieve when there are large drifts in MT, a high frequency of
missing/undetected peaks and closely migrating isobaric interferences.
37
Herein, we introduce a computationally
simpler approach to predict
the MTs of serum metabolites directly based on their migration time
indices (MTI) that avoids the need for effective mobility or time
warping transformations. This concept was inspired by Kováts
retention indices
38
used in gas chromatography
(GC) separations to normalize the RT of a compound between the RTs
of a homologous series of eluting
n
-alkanes that
also enables higher confidence metabolite identification in conjunction
with mass spectral libraries.
39
We demonstrate
that MTIs can be used for reliable annotation of serum metabolites
in MSI-CE-MS with a high degree of accuracy, even with long-term variations
in MT over multiple batches of runs. A MTI algorithm was integrated
directly into the PeakMeister software, which allows for rapid data
preprocessing of a list of authenticated (known or unknown) serum
metabolites by MSI-CE-MS after raw data files are converted to a mzML
format. We performed an extensive validation study to demonstrate
acceptable intermediate precision and good mutual agreement when using
PeakMeister as compared to manual data preprocessing by an experienced
analyst using vendor software. These outcomes were evaluated in a
large-scale metabolomic analysis of more than 5,000 serum samples
from the Brazilian National Survey on Child Nutrition (ENANI-2019)
study.
40
Methods and Materials
All details on reagents, serum
sample pretreatment, MSI-CE-MS operating
conditions, metabolite quantification, standardized data workflow
for serum metabolomic analyses, MTI equation for correcting large
MT variations, and PeakMeister software development are described
in the
Supporting Information
. PeakMeister
is written in the R statistical environment and is accessible on GitHub,
along with a getting started guide and other supporting documentation
(https://github.com/PBM-Group/PeakMeister).
Results and Discussion
A Robust Multiplexed Peak Picking Algorithm in Metabolomics
for MSI-CE-MS
High throughput metabolite profiling by MSI-CE-MS
takes advantage of a serial sample injection format of 13 samples
introduced within each analytical run (
Figure S1
). However, several factors can contribute to nonlinear changes
in the EOF leading to variations in absolute MTs for ions in CE. As
a result, the use of a single marker, such as an internal standard
to calculate RMTs, or a neutral marker to determine effective electrophoretic
mobility, are inadequate to attain long-term MT precision (CV <
2–3%). In this work, we selected two flanking internal standards
that migrate before and after each serum metabolite to calculate a
MTI, which is determined by PeakMeister using MTs supplied by a user
defined table (
eq 1 in Supporting Information
).
Figure
1
outlines
the overall data workflow used in PeakMeister to process multiplexed
MSI-CE-MS data sets from open source mzML files, where an input excel
file containing a list of authenticated serum metabolites (known and
unknown cations) and internal standards for calculating MTIs (
eq 1 in Supporting Information
). Serum metabolites
were then extracted from the mass corrected mzML file to generate
EIEs, which were then smoothed to improve peak picking fidelity. To
accurately locate the position of serum metabolite peaks, the MT for
a series of 11 internal standards (40 μmol/L) were first determined
experimentally. This simple algorithm is supported by a few user-defined
parameters, such as the number of sample injections, full-width-at-half-maximum
(FWHM) for peaks, and the time interval between peaks, whereas deviations
beyond set thresholds likely indicate misannotated peaks. Using the
MTs of these internal standards and the predefined MTIs, PeakMeister
then computes the expected MTs of serum metabolites (
eq 2 in Supporting Information
), integrates signals at these
positions, and then labels their position number (from 1 to 13) as
independent samples introduced on-capillary. This robust peak annotation
process based on MTIs is critical in MSI-CE-MS to identify the correct
sample position corresponding to a specific participant from the ENANI-2019
study, as well as QC, calibrant or blank specimen based on their programmed
serial injection order. Moreover, missing peaks below method detection
limits are annotated as “<LOD”, whereas closely migrating
isobaric interferences are labeled as “Interfered” to
alert for peak overlap. The final results for PeakMeister are then
exported in two csv files containing all annotated/integrated peaks,
and serum metabolite MTI or RMT. These results are also summarized
as a series of integrated EIE plots that can be reviewed by an analyst
to ensure acceptable performance.
Figure 1
PeakMeister is an automated
data preprocessing tool for peak picking
and sample position assignment in metabolomics when using a serial
sample injection format in MSI-CE-MS. A targeted molecular feature
list and adjustable parameters are user defined and conveniently stored
in a xlsx file as an input. PeakMeister first performs a mass calibration
to correct for mass drift and then extracts and smooths the user supplied
panel of internal standards and serum metabolites to generate EIEs
for peak detection. An algorithm is then applied to the internal standard
EIEs to identify the most abundant peaks. This information is then
used in conjunction with MTIs for MT prediction of each serum metabolite
peak. The predicted MTs are then used to identify sample peaks in
the corresponding EIEs, including the correct injection order of samples.
After identifying and integrating all peaks, PeakMeister generates
EIE plots and csv files with an output of integrated peak areas and
MTs for all annotated serum metabolites.
Migration Time Prediction Accuracy of MTIs
Validation
of PeakMeister was performed on a panel of serum metabolites, which
were previously credentialized in an untargeted manner
41
in a pooled serum (QC) sample from the ENANI-2019
study when using a dilution trend filter in MSI-CE-MS with temporal
signal pattern recognition.
42
Briefly,
serum metabolites, including unknown cations, were deemed authentic
and reliable provided they were measured with adequate precision in
QC samples (CV < 30%) without appreciable blank signal (<5%)
while also exhibiting a linear decrease in ion response upon serial
dilution as described by Shanmuganathan et al.
23
Also, serum metabolites were subject to additional scrutiny
for selection as they needed to have adequate technical precision
from repeat QCs (CV < 40%,
n
= 420) with high
detection frequency (>70%)
20
,
37
following analysis
of all serum samples from the ENANI-2019 study. Overall, 47 serum
metabolites (including 7 unknown cations) and 11 internal standards
satisfied this multitiered selection criteria, which were then independently
processed by PeakMeister and compared to manually processed data using
vendor software.
Figure S2
highlights the
standardized metabolomics data workflow in MSI-CE-MS, which started
each day with a duplicate six-point calibration run and a proficiency
test run of NIST SRM-1950 human plasma with blank samples, prior to
12 serum and a QC sample analyzed in a randomized sequence in each
analytical run.
Figure
2
A illustrates a plot depicting the mean MTs and accurate mass
(
m
/
z
) for 47 serum metabolites consistently
measured by MSI-CE-MS together with 11 internal standards that served
as reference peaks for MTI determination by PeakMeister. Long-term
MT variations for three representative serum metabolites are shown
in
Figure
2
B, namely
creatinine, isoleucine (Ile), and hypoxanthine (HyX). Daily preventative
maintenance, including ion source cleaning and mass tuning, were implemented
during the analysis of diluted serum filtrates samples when using
MSI-CE-MS, with new BGE/sheath liquid solutions prepared each week
and 25 different fused-silica capillaries (dashed lines) used across
3 batches (solid lines). New preconditioned bare fused-silica capillaries
were used whenever current instability was observed that could not
be salvaged by further rinsing or capillary inlet alignment. Overall,
greater variation in MTs become evident following the first two batches
(<2–5 min) that subsequently increased up to 20 min for
slow migrating metabolites relative to the first analytical run toward
the end of the third batch of runs. In total, serum metabolome analysis
by MSI-CE-MS required 40 days of data acquisition across 3 batches
of runs using a single instrument platform that was also used for
other projects, which comprised a total of 5,433 serum filtrates and
QC samples analyzed over an eight-month period.
Figure 2
(A) Plot of 47 serum metabolites (green circles) and 11 internal
standards (yellow circles) measured consistently by MSI-CE-MS from
the ENANI-2019 study. (B) MT variability in MSI-CE-MS is extensive
after analysis of 5,433 serum samples (including 420 QCs) with MT
shifts exceeding 20 min for certain serum metabolites. This leads
to high mean absolute error (MAE) when comparing absolute MT changes
over time (run 1 used as reference). (C) However, MT can be accurately
predicted with PeakMeister when using a co-migrating stable-isotope
internal standard, such as creatinine that had a MAE reduced from
95 s to only 0.30 s. Alternatively, use of MTIs in PeakMeister for
serum metabolites having two flanking internal standards when stable-isotope
internal standards were lacking, such as isoleucine, also resulted
in a major reduction in MAE from 106 s to only 1.5 s. However, late
migrating metabolites with only one internal standard, such as serum
hypoxanthine, had a more modest decrease in MAE from 146 to 15.3 s.
Overall, MSI-CE-MS is prone to greater long-term MT drift when using
different capillaries (dotted gray lines) while acquiring data across
3 batches (solid black lines) over an 8 month period. (D) Overall,
PeakMeister provided a 36-fold improvement in MT prediction accuracy
when using MTIs or RMTs than MTs in MSI-CE-MS with a median MAE of
only 2.9 s for all 47 serum metabolites.
As expected, the optimal method for correcting
MT drift was the
use of a comigrating stable-isotope internal standard (available for
8 of 47 metabolites) or a nearly comigrating internal standard (3
of 47 metabolites), to enable effective peak alignment as shown in
Figure
2
B,
2
C
for serum creatinine. Here, the mean absolute
error (MAE) decreased over 220-fold from 67 s to only 0.30 s resulting
in no significant within or between batch effects with an IQR of 0.0
s despite long-term drifts in MTs exceeding 8 min. However, stable-isotope
internal standards are not feasible in untargeted metabolomics involving
novel/unknown compounds, nor practical or cost-effective to perform
when analyzing large panels of metabolites or lipids. In our work,
the stable- isotope internal standards were primarily used for fast
migrating serum metabolites (e.g., trimethylamine-
N
-oxide, TMAO) that were more prone to ion suppression effects close
to the salt front (e.g., sodium) when analyzing serum or plasma filtrates.
Otherwise, for 34 serum metabolites, such as Ile, MT predictions from
their corresponding MTI were achieved using two of the closest flanking
internal standards (of the 11) in MSI-CE-MS. Similar batch effects
and nonlinear changes in MTs were apparent for serum Ile (
Figure
2
B) that exceeded
17 min with a MAE of 106 s, but this large variation was effectively
reduced 71-fold to only 1.5 s when using a MTI algorithm with carnitine-d3
and F-Phe as two optimal pairs of internal standards (
Figure
2
C). The multiplexed separation
format in MSI-CE-MS adds another layer of complexity to data preprocessing
since Ile and leucine (Leu) as structural isomers, migrate closely
to each other resulting in 26 peaks to be resolved and correctly annotated
within each analytical run. While open-access and commercial software
tools are available for peak alignment in LC-MS, most methods can
only tolerate much lower RT drifts in reversed-phase LC-MS contributed
by small leaks, minor degradation of column performance, and sample
matrix interferences.
43
Typically, these
temporal shifts are on the order of seconds depending on the RT of
metabolite, stationary phase, and gradient elution conditions, often
less than 15 s as reported by Brunis et al.
44
in their analysis of 503 plasma samples using reversed-phase LC-MS.
However, CE specific software tools such as ROMANCE,
35
,
45
which converts the MT dimension to an effective electrophoretic
mobility scale, have not been extensively validated in large-scale
metabolomic studies while requiring extra processing times for data
transformation. Overall, there were only two instances where MTI were
not computed for slow migrating serum metabolites, namely HyX and
an unknown cation (unknown 4;
m
/
z
:RMT; 276.1191:1.088) as they both migrated after the last internal
standard (Cl-Tyr). Overall, the RMT correction reduced MT shifts and
batch effects, but the outcome was less effective as compared to MTIs.
For instance, although serum HyX underwent a large MT drift between
batches exceeding 20 min (
Figure
2
B), the RMT adjustment in PeakMeister was able to lower
the MAE 9.4-fold to 15.3 s with an IQR of 20.1 s (
Figure
2
C). For these reasons, an additional
late migrating internal standard is recommended to further improve
the peak picking performance of PeakMeister in MSI-CE-MS for HyX.
Nevertheless, overall MT prediction accuracy for all 47 serum metabolites
(e.g., 34 using MTIs, 8 using stable-isotope internal standards, 3
using closely comigrating internal standards, and 2 using RMTs) improved
36-fold with a median MAE of only 2.9 s compared to 105 s for MTs
without correction (
Figure
2
D).
Peak Picking Fidelity and Data Integration Outcomes
All serum metabolomic data collected from the ENANI-2019 study was
processed manually by an experienced analyst, as well as automatically
by PeakMeister to allow for a direct comparison of peak picking and
data integration performance for 47 serum metabolite and 11 internal
standard peaks (
n
= 224,983) by MSI-CE-MS. As expected,
the peak annotation for internal standards using PeakMeister, which
had excellent ion responses (S/
N
> 20) without
missing
peaks or isobaric interferences, was found to be extremely accurate,
where the agreement with manual processed data was near perfect except
for 4 misannotated peaks, corresponding to an overall failure rate
of only 0.007% out of 55,000 total peaks analyzed (
Figure S3A
). In these rare cases, spurious noise occurred
near the peaks of interest resulted in incorrect peak picking by PeakMeister.
In contrast, as serum metabolites were measured in a national nutritional
survey of young children from Brazil having large between-subject
variability, they frequently were not the most intense peaks within
an EIE, with spurious signals or isobaric peaks of greater intensity
being a potential cause for peak picking error. Consequently, reliable
peak picking for serum metabolites using MTIs was needed to reduce
annotation errors for electrophoretic peaks notably when using serial
sample injections in MSI-CE-MS.
The excellent annotation of
predicted MTs from MTIs using PeakMeister, as highlighted in
Figure
2
, translated into
exceptional peak picking accuracy with a median error rate of only
0.05% (out of 169,983 total peaks analyzed), where 14 serum metabolites
exhibited perfect peak picking agreement (error rate of 0%) relative
to manual processing by an experienced analyst. As expected, 4 of
the 8 serum metabolites with stable-isotope internal standards were
included in this list, where the remaining 4 metabolites had only
1–2 incorrectly assigned peaks in total. Otherwise, serum metabolites
with modestly higher error rates (1.0–2.0%) were typically
detected as low intensity peaks having a higher background noise,
where PeakMeister selected a spurious noise peak rather than the true
peak of interest. For instance, serum cysteinylglycine-cysteine oxidized
disulfide (CysGly-CySS) is a low abundance metabolite in circulation
when using MSI-CE-MS (
Figure S4
). Unsurprisingly,
the only two compounds with much higher error rates than CysGly-Cys-SS
were the two slow migrating metabolites that relied on less robust
RMT adjustments with only a single internal standard (Cl-Tyr), namely
serum HyX (8.7%) and unknown 4 (7.4%). In these cases, peak picking
accuracy by PeakMeister was hindered by poor MT predictions due to
large within and between batch effects. Of the 1,405 incorrectly annotated
peaks (1,401 serum metabolites and 4 internal standards) over half
(
n
= 795) were caused by just these two late migrating
serum metabolites, corresponding to an error rate of about 2 peaks
per data file. Overall, only 1 of the 421 sample mzML files analyzed
by PeakMeister from the ENANI-2019 study showed an excessive high
error rate (73 incorrectly annotated peaks) which was subsequently
excluded from our final analysis (
Figure S5
). This error was attributed to very low signals measured for ornithine-15N
in this data file, which caused poor peak detection of this internal
standard and serum metabolites that rely on it for MTI determination.
Our work highlights the importance of selecting an appropriate series
of internal standards having electrophoretic mobilities spanning the
entire MT range for serum metabolites with clearly defined signals
given their direct impacts on peak annotation fidelity in MSI-CE-MS.
The outstanding peak picking capability for serum metabolites using
PeakMeister (median accuracy >99.9%) also translated into excellent
peak integration agreement with manual data processing, which is critical
to ensure reliable quantification of serum metabolites based on their
relative peak areas (RPAs). All serum metabolites were normalized
to a single internal standard (Cl-Tyr) for their quantification except
for eight metabolites with matching stable-isotope internal standards.
Overall, the mean bias between PeakMeister and manual data processing
for 47 serum metabolites was only −2.1% with only two compounds,
unknown 7 (
m
/
z
:MTI; 471.7380:0.803)
and unknown 2 (
m
/
z
:MTI: 129.0660:0.064)
exceeding the 95% confidence limits as shown in the Bland-Altman %
difference plot (
Figure S3B
). As expected,
a strong correlation (median
r
= 0.98) was achieved
when comparing the two data preprocessing methods for all 47 serum
metabolites with the only major outlier being unknown 7 (
Figure S6
). The weaker correlation (
r
= 0.68) for this unknown cation was due to its low abundance near
the method detection limit, which was most evident in batch 3 (
Figure S7
). As a result, careful data review
and further parameter optimization in PeakMeister may be warranted
for certain low abundance metabolites.
PeakMeister Accuracy for Metabolite Quantification and Intermediate
Precision
Overall, 16 plasma metabolites in reference samples
from NIST SRM-1950 were measured in common with MSI-CE-MS, which were
analyzed once every day (
n
= 40) for proficiency
testing and external validation. Similarly, calibrant solutions for
these 16 metabolites were also analyzed as the first MSI-CE-MS run
each day using our standardized data workflow (
Figure S2
), which were processed to generate a duplicate 6-point
calibration curve. Data for the calibration curves acquired for 16
metabolite standards throughout the ENANI-2019 study are summarized
in
Table S1
. The automated integration
of this data by PeakMeister proved very reliable with excellent linearity
(
R
2
> 0.98) and acceptable long-term
precision
(median CVs < 18%,
n
= 480) for all 16 metabolites
across 3 different batches over 40 days of operation. The external
calibration curves were then used to quantify 16 plasma metabolites
from NIST SRM-1950 with average concentrations calculated after each
day of runs. In general, acceptable mutual agreement was achieved
in this study with a mean bias of −1.3% between mean plasma
concentrations measured by MSI-CE-MS with automated PeakMeister data
preprocessing as compared to reference values reported by NIST as
shown in a Bland-Altman % difference plot (
Figure S3C
). Although method bias ranged from −28% to +25%
for alanine and cystine respectively (
Table S1
), similar outcomes were also found with manual processed data and
NIST reported values (
Figure S3D
). Thus,
bias in plasma metabolite quantification was not attributed to either
data preprocessing method, but likely due to differences in analytical
procedures. Fo example, NIST used LC-MS/MS or GC-MS protocols following
organic solvent deproteinization and
/
or chemical
derivatization for metabolite quantification, whereas our method involved
a direct analysis of diluted plasma filtrates after a simple ultrafiltration
step. Also, a single internal standard (Cl-Tyr) was used for data
normalization for most plasma metabolites with only two compounds
having stable-isotope internal standards, histidine and creatinine,
which had a mean bias of similar magnitude ranging from −12.3%
and +11.3% respectively (
Table S1
).
The intermediate precision for automated data preprocessing by PeakMeister
was determined by computing the mean CV from repeat analysis of pooled
QC samples (
n
= 420) included in every analytical
run by MSI-CE-MS while analyzing serum samples (
n
= 5,000) from the ENANI-2019 study. Also, control charts were generated
from an internal standard (F-Phe) after completion of data preprocessing
and used to identify potential outlier data exceeding ±3 standard
deviations from the mean, a process that was simple to automate and
implement. Using this algorithm, the number of missing data points
were typically less for PeakMeister compared to manual integration,
with the largest differences occurring for low abundance serum metabolites,
such as CysGly-CySS, unknown 7, and unknown 5 (
m
/
z
:MTI; 334.6885:0.432) (
Figure S8
). Better agreement between data preprocessing techniques may be
realized by setting a higher S/N threshold on PeakMeister to prevent
integration of spurious signals. Nevertheless, the intermediate precision
of MSI-CE-MS serum metabolome analyses following a QC-based batch
correction
23
was quite consistent for PeakMeister
compared to manual integration with both having a median CV of 16%
(
n
= 420) as shown in the principal component analysis
(PCA) 2D scores plots that were substantially lower than the biological
variation of serum metabolites (
Figure
3
A,B). A closer evaluation (
Figure
3
C) highlights the good agreement when quantifying
most serum metabolites from the ENANI-2019 study when using PeakMeister,
except for CysGly-CySS, unknown 7, and symmetric-dimethylarginine
(SDMA). This outcome is unsurprising given that these three serum
metabolites had the lowest correlation coefficients when comparing
PeakMeister to manually integrated data (
Figure S6
). Serum CysGly-CySS and unknown 7 also had poor agreement
in terms of the total number of missing QC values (
Figure S8
). Lastly, intermediate precision was also assessed
via control charts of an internal standard (F-Phe) added to all serum
and QC samples (
n
= 5,420), where both data preprocessing
techniques showed consistent outcomes with a mean CV of 9.2% (
Figure S9A
) and 8.5% (
Figure S9B
) for PeakMeister and manual integration, respectively.
Both control charts showed a modest between-batch effect, however
this long-term signal drift was attenuated after the QC batch correction
algorithm
44
with a mean CV of 7.8% (
Figure
3
D) and 7.5% (
Figure
3
E) for PeakMeister
and manual integration data preprocessing methods, respectively.
Figure 3
Principal
component analysis (PCA) comparing intermediate precision
of a large-scale serum metabolome analysis by MSI-CE-MS with data
preprocessing using (A) PeakMeister and (B) manual data integration
following a QC-based batch correction. Both data processing methods
had an analogous intermediate precision when integrating 47 serum
metabolites from pooled QC samples with a median CV of 16% (
n
= 420) over 3 batches of analyses with similar biological
variation (61% and 52%) in individual serum samples from the ENANI-2019
study (
n
= 5,000). (C) Overall precision was consistent
between the two data preprocessing techniques except for three serum
metabolites, including CysGly-CySS, unknown 7, and SDMA, which were
low abundance metabolites that had more variable peak integration
outcomes by PeakMeister. Control charts of F-Phe (40 μmol/L)
added to all serum samples (
n
= 5,420) demonstrated
excellent long-term precision for (D) PeakMeister with a mean CV of
7.8% that was comparable to (E) manual integration with a mean CV
of 7.5% after batch correction.
Automated Data Preprocessing Performance and Serum Metabolite
Reference Intervals
We have rigorously validated PeakMeister
in a large-scale metabolomics study comprising 5,000 serum samples,
420 pooled QC samples, 468 NIST SRM-1950 plasma samples, and 480 calibrants
(80 calibration curves) analyzed by MSI-CE-MS under positive ion mode
detection. Despite these real-world operating conditions common to
large-scale prospective studies, PeakMeister generated results in
good agreement with manual integration which was performed by an experienced
analyst using vendor software. For instance, serum serine (Ser) had
an ideal outcome as reflected in a representative EIE which consisted
of well resolved and detectable peaks originating from 13 different
serum samples (
Figure S10A
). Conversely,
serum metabolite isomers, such as Ile (
Figure S10B
) and Leu (
Figure S10C
) were
partially resolved by MSI-CE-MS, making their EIEs more complex to
process by PeakMeister. However, they were still consistently annotated
given the accuracy and precision at which their MTs were predicted
when using a peak picking algorithm based on MTIs. However, certain
serum metabolites were more prone to matrix derived isobaric interferences
in MSI-CE-MS with full-scan data acquisition, which is dependent on
the mass resolution and scanning mode of the mass analyzer. To overcome
this obstacle, users can input known interferences for certain metabolites
and PeakMeister will automatically check for comigration of these
molecular features and record these instances as a likely interference.
For instance, although serum trimethylamine-
N
-oxide
(TMAO;
m
/
z
76.0762) was not completely
mass resolved from glycine (Gly;
m
/
z
76.0399) using a TOF-MS system, it was partially resolved electrophoretically
in most samples, PeakMeister verified if these isobaric ions were
comigrating in certain samples and labeled the interfering peaks to
TMAO as “Interfered” to prevent bias due to peak overlap
(
Figure S10D
). In this case, data integration
for serum TMAO from this specific sample was not reported due to isobaric
comigration. Alternatively, MSI-CE-MS/MS in conjunction with multiple
reaction monitoring can be used for improved selectivity and sensitivity
for the targeted analysis of low abundance metabolites
37
or higher resolution Orbitrap mass analyzers
for untargeted analyses.
46
Another
challenge was low abundance serum metabolites near or below method
detection limits (S/
N
< 3 or any user defined
value) which still required annotation to correctly label certain
samples analyzed by MSI-CE-MS as having nondetected metabolites. To
ensure these features were correctly labeled, PeakMeister computes
the S/N of all peaks in each EIE and labels peaks with S/N below the
user set threshold as “<LOD” following data preprocessing
(
Figure S10E
). Lastly, certain serum metabolites
may not be detected due to its low natural abundance, or in the case
of exogenous metabolites, low average exposure. In these instances,
if no peak was detected, then PeakMeister annotated the expected position
of the peak as “NPD” (no peak detected), again allowing
for appropriate annotation to be performed after analysis. For example,
serum proline betaine exhibited a very large range of signals including
instances where no peaks were detected since its concentrations in
blood reflect recent dietary intake of citrus fruit reflecting a habitual
Prudent diet (
Figure S10F
).
47
Annotated EIE plots are standard outputs for
PeakMeister that allows users to review peak picking, integration
and sample position assignment for each serum metabolite in each MSI-CE-MS
run. PeakMeister also produces two CSV files containing MTs and peak
areas for all data collected, with annotations (“Interfered”,
“<LOD”, and “NPD”) included so that
specific imputations can be made prior to statistical analysis, including
optimal missing value input decisions.
48
Furthermore, a third CSV file is generated by PeakMeister which
reports the MTIs or RMTs for each serum metabolite as well as internal
standard(s) used in their computation, which can be used for reporting
purposes. All of this data is saved in a folder along with a copy
of the user parameters to maximize traceability, transparency, and
data organization.
Overall, automated preprocessing of serum
metabolome data by PeakMeister,
which included the analysis of serum/plasma samples, pooled QCs/reference
samples, calibrants, and blanks, was processed within 4 days with
a standard desktop computer (Core i7–9700 @ 3.00 GHz, 32 Gb
of DDR4 RAM @ 2677 MHz). Also, one workday of manual preprocessing
time was needed for initial optimization of input parameters in PeakMeister
for each of the 3 batches. However, this was a fraction of the approximate
125 days required to manually integrate the data by an experienced
analyst in our laboratory. To this end, we achieved our primary objective
of developing a rapid and automated data preprocessing tool that is
optimal for high throughput data acquisition when using a serial sample
injection format in MSI-CE-MS. This work comprised a substudy of a
population-based household survey that assessed breastfeeding, dietary
intake, anthropometric assessment of nutritional status, and micronutrient
deficiencies in 14,558 children under the age of five from 1,500 census
enumeration areas across Brazil.
49
Using
sample data preprocessed by PeakMeister (after removal of an outlier
data file), reference intervals for 40 serum metabolites with available
chemical standards from 5,000 participants from the ENANI-2019 study
are summarized in
Table S2
. These intervals,
which were derived from largely nonfasting serum collected from healthy
children between the ages of 6 months and 5 years across different
regions of Brazil, have the potential to improve risk assessment of
excess adiposity in childhood,
50
as well
as understand the impact of gut microflora on health outcomes during
infancy
51
and across multiple generations
within the maternal lineage.
52
Certain
circulating metabolites can also serve as promising dietary biomarkers
of food intake and complex eating patterns that are difficult to assess
when using food frequency questionnaires since they are prone to misreporting.
53
Current work is underway to evaluate putative
biomarkers associated with dietary exposures and/or microbial activity
using MSI-CE-MS serum metabolome data, which may be useful for risk
assessment of developmental delays in early childhood.
40
Also, PeakMeister extends well beyond MSI-CE-MS
since it is suitable to process serial sample injections implemented
in isocratic elution LC-MS methods for ultrafast targeted metabolite
analyses,
54
as well as comprehensive lipidomic
analysis by LC-MS using a single sample injection format.
55
Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrate that PeakMeister,
an open-access software
tool available on GitHub, can significantly reduce data preprocessing
times in MSI-CE-MS by over 30-fold while maintaining outstanding peak
annotation fidelity as compared to manual data preprocessing. Two
major challenges were overcome in this large-scale serum metabolomics
study, namely accurate peak picking and consistent sample position
assignment when using a serial injection format in MSI-CE-MS despite
large MT variability and long-term between-batch effects. Importantly,
the use of a MTI for each serum metabolite with two flanking internal
standards (or a single stable-isotope internal standard) drastically
lowered the mean absolute prediction error for MT within a few seconds
that is comparable to reversed-phase LC-MS metabolomic analyses. Moreover,
acceptable intermediate precision and accuracy for metabolite quantification
was demonstrated by PeakMeister after being extensively tested on
more than 6,368 samples overall. This included 5,000 serum filtrates
from the ENANI-2019 study together with 468 NIST SRM-1950 plasma samples,
420 pooled QCs, and 480 calibrant solutions that were acquired efficiently
over 40 days of data acquisition on a single instrumental platform
across 3 batches over an eight-month period. Moreover, all data preprocessing
using PeakMeister was directly performed on mzML files without computationally
intensive dynamic time warping algorithms or effective mobility transformation.
However, certain late migrating serum metabolites lacking two flanking
or a stable-isotope internal standard were prone to peak misannotation,
including low abundance metabolites with signals near the method detection
limit. Future work is underway to develop a more user-friendly software
interface for PeakMeister as required for high throughput MSI-CE-MS
metabolomic analyses in different sample matrices (e.g., urine, saliva,
stool) with the capability of “real-time” data preprocessing
output for review (e.g., control charts, calibration curves, QC checks)
rather than being performed retrospectively weeks or months after
data acquisition. PeakMeister may also prove useful in multiplexed
LC-MS analyses, as well as HILIC based separations that are susceptible
to greater RT variations albeit to a much lesser extent than CE. We
anticipate that PeakMeister will assist new users to MSI-CE-MS since
it is more cost-effective and sustainable given its lower infrastructure,
energy and organic solvent requirements than conventional LC-MS methods
for large-scale metabolomic studies.