Introduction
Developments in therapeutic strategies to treat cancer have led to improved success
in the initial stages of cancer treatment
1
,
but the acquisition of drug resistance and development of metastasis are roadblocks to
improving progression free survival and disease free survival in the clinic
2
–
6
.
With their fast growth rate, rapid adaptive mechanisms, and metastatic phenotypes, lung
cancer and melanoma remain two of the most prominent and lethal cancers worldwide
7
.
Melanoma, if not detected and treated early in disease progression, is one of the
most deadly cancers due to its fast growth rate and high likelihood of metastasis
8
,
9
. Over
half of all melanomas are driven by a mutation in the BRAF protein at position
V600
10
, which leads to constitutive
activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, RAF-MEK-ERK (
Fig. S1a
). The prevalence of this
mutation motivated the development of several targeted kinase inhibitors selective for
mutant BRAF over wild-type BRAF
11
–
13
. Three of these drugs gained FDA approval over
the last decade: vemurafenib, dabrafenib, and encorafenib (respective patient
C
max
values of 9.8μM
14
, 1.6μM
15
, and
2.0μM
16
). However, in spite of
initial positive and dramatic patient responses to these inhibitors, resistance almost
inevitably develops
8
,
9
.
It is becoming increasingly appreciated that cancer cells use non-genetic adaptive
mechanisms to escape the action of cancer drugs
2
–
6
,
17
,
18
. Studies of “persister
cells”, cells that survive treatment with targeted cancer inhibitors
3
, and “escapees”, a subpopulation
of persister cells that escape quiescence to re-enter the cell cycle in the presence of
these drugs
17
, have elucidated that
non-genetic adaptive mechanisms are critical to cancer cell survival and eventual
acquisition of drug resistance. In melanoma, many of these adaptive mechanisms involve
reinitiation of pro-proliferation signaling, alterations in DNA repair pathways, and
pro-survival stress signaling
17
,
19
.
The Integrated Stress Response (ISR,
Fig. S1b
) is one such pathway that is being
highlighted in current non-genetic drug adaptation research
20
. In canonical contexts, the ISR responds to various
stresses through activation of four stress-sensing kinases: (1) general control
non-derepressible 2 (GCN2) canonically senses amino acid insufficiency via uncharged
tRNA
21
; (2) heme-regulated inhibitor
(HRI) senses heme deprivation
22
and
mitochondrial stress
23
–
26
; (3) protein kinase R (PKR) senses cytoplasmic
double-stranded RNA
27
; (4) protein kinase
R-like ER kinase (PERK) senses un/misfolded protein
28
,
29
. When activated, each of
these dimeric kinases undergoes a conformational change and auto-phosphorylation, and then
phosphorylates the translation initiation factor eIF2α, which prevents the binding of
GTP to the eIF2α protein
30
. This
then lowers the levels of the eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNA complex, which impairs global cap-dependent
protein translation
31
, but promotes the
translation of mRNAs with unique 5’ untranslated region elements, including
ATF4
32
. The ATF4 transcription factor
is then translated, highly post-translationally modified, selects a dimerization partner,
and translocates to the nucleus where groups of stress-responsive genes are transcribed in a
stimulus-specific manner
33
,
34
. These gene sets can be either pro-survival (including
amino acid synthetases, folding chaperones, and DNA repair enzymes)
35
–
40
or
pro-apoptotic (via induction of CHOP, induction of ATF6, and suppression of Bcl-2
proteins)
39
,
41
, depending on the strength and duration of the stress
33
.
While GCN2, one of the ISR kinases, is best known for its role in sensing and
responding to amino acid limitation
42
, its
cellular influence is wider than was initially understood
43
. Recent publications detail GCN2’s role in
sensing and regulating stalled or collided ribosomes
44
,
45
, regulating and being
regulated by mTORC1
46
–
49
, and responding to UV irradiation
50
,
51
. Further, GCN2
has been implicated in several cancer resistance and metastasis phenotypes
52
–
55
. Numerous small molecule GCN2 modulators are currently being developed to
activate and inhibit GCN2 in hopes of therapeutic benefit in the treatment of cancer, with
Hibercell’s HC-7366 recently receiving fast track designation for the treatment of
acute myeloid leukemia and renal cell carcinoma
55
.
The ISR is a nuanced and highly variable system, and its activation results in
significant transcriptional changes to the cell
56
. Off-target activation of such a system would result in unpredictable,
context-dependent outcomes. Over the last three years, four groups have published
observations in which the ISR is activated by off-target actions of the kinase inhibitors
neratinib, erlotinib, gefitinib, dovitinib, and adavosertib
57
–
60
. All
describe a mechanism whereby at low doses, the inhibitor binds a single active site of the
dimeric GCN2 kinase, which increases affinity of the second active site for ATP,
paradoxically activating the kinase
57
–
59
. As the concentration
of the inhibitor increases, both active sites become occluded, and the kinase is then fully
inhibited. This results in a characteristic biphasic activation-inhibition curve in response
to increasing drug concentration. While the mechanism of off-target GCN2 activation by the
above drugs has been described biochemically and structurally, the cellular and tumor-level
effects of this off-target are not fully understood.
Herein, we describe the ability of clinical BRAF
V600
inhibitors
dabrafenib, encorafenib, and vemurafenib to elicit this same off-target effect on GCN2. In
long-term cancer outgrowth experiments, we show that attenuation of the off-target effect
via cotreatment with a GCN2 inhibitor enhances cancer cell outgrowth in A375 melanoma and
PC9 lung cancer cell models, suggesting that the off-target effect is detrimental to the
cancer cell contexts we tested here.
Results
ATF4 induction in response to BRAF inhibitors is uncoupled from MAPK
inhibition.
Previous work from our lab in melanoma cells identified a subset of
drug-tolerant persister cells that initially enter quiescence in response to BRAF/MEK
inhibition but escape quiescence within 3–4 days to enter a slow-cycling state
(“escapees”)
17
,
19
. We previously found that escapees express
ATF4 and induce an ATF4-dependent transcriptional program
17
. We originally set out to delineate the role and
timing of ATF4 induction in escapees under BRAF/MEK inhibition, and thus designed an
improved ATF4 activity reporter (UTR.ATF4-mCit,
Fig.
1a
) by adapting an existing reporter of ATF4 induction
24
for a fluorescence time-lapse microscopy setting. The
sensor is based on a fluorescent protein sequence shielded by the upstream regulatory
sequence of ATF4, ensuring translational control mirroring that of the endogenous ATF4
protein (
Fig. 1a
). By switching out the commonly used
RFP for mCitrine, we shortened the half-life of the sensor and reduced protein
aggregation, which otherwise problematically activates the PERK-eIF2α-ATF4 axis. We
then added a dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) degron domain to ensure rapid degradation of
mCitrine, unless the system is stabilized by addition of trimethoprim (TMP) that masks the
DHFR degron, which may be done in a concentration-responsive manner (
Fig. S1c
–
f
). We ensured TMP itself did not activate the
ISR, using thapsigargin (a known activator of PERK
61
), as a positive control (
Fig. S1e
). Use of TMP keeps the background
ATF4-mCitrine levels low. We then multiplexed our UTR.ATF4-mCit sensor with our DHB-based
sensor for CDK2 activity
62
(to
distinguish single-cell proliferation-quiescence decisions,
Fig. 1b
) and fluorescently labeled H2B
62
(a nuclear marker for cell tracking) in A375 BRAF
V600E
human melanoma cells.
When we began imaging ATF4 induction under BRAF/MEK inhibition and tracking
single cells with EllipTrack
63
, we
unexpectedly observed an immediate and intense activation of the UTR.ATF4-mCit sensor in
response to dabrafenib treatment in every cell (
Fig.
1c
column 1–2 and
S1c
). This immediate ATF4 activation, which began within 1h of treatment, was a
distinct phenomenon from what we had previously observed in escapees, which induce ATF4
after 3–4 days of treatment, coincident with cell-cycle re-entry under drug
challenge
17
. The rapid ATF4
induction was attenuated by pretreatment with 2BAct (
Fig. S1g
), an inhibitor that blocks the ISR at
the point of eIF2α
64
, indicating
canonical ISR signaling via the ISR kinase-eIF2α-ATF4 axis. Immunofluorescence
imaging of endogenous ATF4 also revealed a rapid accumulation of ATF4 in response to
2μM dabrafenib with peak ATF4 achieved by 5–6h (
Fig S1h
). By contrast, inhibition of ERK using
1μM SCH772984 or inhibition of MEK using 10nM trametinib had no effect on ATF4
induction (
Fig. 1c
column 3 and
Fig. S1h
), but co-treatment with dabrafenib +
trametinib still yielded strong ATF4 induction (
Fig.
1c
column 4). We conclude that the observed ATF4 induction was not a result of
generally inhibiting the MAPK pathway, and hypothesized instead that it was related to
dabrafenib itself.
ATF4 undergoes paradoxical activation-inhibition in response to increasing
concentrations of dabrafenib and encorafenib.
To determine if dabrafenib exhibited the biphasic activation-inhibition curve
previously reported for erlotinib and neratinib
57
, we treated A375 cells with increasing doses of various RAF
inhibitors, including dabrafenib (BRAF
V600
), encorafenib (BRAF
V600
),
vemurafenib (BRAF
V600
), sorafenib (CRAF), and trametinib (MEK, as a negative
control). We found that dabrafenib and encorafenib indeed induced ATF4 in a biphasic
manner with peak induction at 2μM and 4μM, respectively (
Fig. 1d
, top). Importantly, these values are clinically relevant,
as the patient C
max
for dabrafenib is 1.6μM
15
and the patient C
max
for encorafenib is
2μM
16
. ATF4 was also induced
by high doses of vemurafenib and sorafenib (peak induction 16–32μM), but we
did not detect the attenuation of ATF4 at high doses, which would have required testing
concentrations beyond the drugs’ aqueous solubility limits. Importantly,
trametinib, an allosteric inhibitor of MEK, did not exhibit any induction of ATF4 at any
dose tested (
Fig. 1d
, top). We further found that
this biphasic activation-inhibition effect was independent of phospho-ERK level (
Fig. 1d
, bottom). That is to say, ATF4 could be induced
upon blockade of MAPK signaling (dabrafenib, encorafenib, and vemurafenib) or in the
presence of MAPK signaling (sorafenib).
GCN2 activity is necessary for dabrafenib- and encorafenib-induced ATF4
expression.
To determine the mechanism by which BRAF
V600
inhibitors were inducing
ATF4, we knocked down each ISR kinase and measured ATF4 induction in response to
dabrafenib (
Fig. 2a
,
b
). While siRNA methods are commonly used for knockdown, it is well known that
double-stranded siRNA/target-mRNA complexes in the cytoplasm can activate PKR
65
,
66
,
the ISR kinase responsible for sensing viral infection. To avoid unintended activation of
ATF4, we designed a CRISPRi microscopy platform with single cell resolution and live- and
fixed-cell capabilities (scCRISPRi,
Fig.
S2a
,
b
). We stably
expressed the CRISPRi machinery (dCas9–KRAB–MeCP2) with H2B-mTurqoise2
(separated via a P2A sequence) and used flow cytometry to isolate a homogenous population
expressing this machinery. Transfection with plasmids containing the sequences for firefly
luciferase as well as a sgRNA against our protein of interest allowed us to
computationally identify the cells expressing the sgRNA via the luciferase
immunofluorescence signal. This strategy allows for classical knockdown comparisons
between wells (
Fig. 2a
) as well as intra-well
comparisons, where positive and negative cells from the same well can also be directly
compared after computational segregation (
Fig. S2c
).
Employing this scCRISPRi platform, we knocked down each of the ISR kinases for
48h and then treated with 2μM dabrafenib or 1μM thapsigargin for 6h,
followed by fixation and immunofluorescence staining (
Fig
2a
–
b
). As expected, thapsigargin
caused a strong induction of ATF4 that was suppressed by knockdown of PERK. Treatment with
dabrafenib also strongly activated ATF4, and this activation was suppressed by knockdown
of GCN2 but not by knockdown of the other three kinases. We thus identified GCN2 as the
most likely ISR kinase responsible for the observed induction of ATF4.
Since GCN2 is best known for its role in sensing amino acid
deprivation
42
, we tested whether
dabrafenib was causing a rapid drop in amino acid levels leading to uncharged tRNA and
GCN2 activation. We quantified amino acid levels of treated A375 cells using gas
chromatography–mass spectrometry, using amino acid-free media as a control. While a
6hr amino acid withdrawal caused a dramatic depletion of most amino acids, as expected, a
6hr treatment with trametinib, dabrafenib, encorafenib, or vemurafenib, did not cause any
depletion of cellular amino acids (
Fig 2c
and
S2d
–
e
). Intriguingly, we observe a large
4–5-fold increase in asparagine levels upon dabrafenib, encorafenib, and
vemurafenib treatments. Asparagine synthetase (
ASNS
) is one of the
best-studied transcriptional targets of the GCN2–eIF2α–ATF4
axis
67
, further supporting that GCN2
is the ISR kinase responsible for ATF4 induction by BRAF
V600
inhibitors.
To test whether GCN2 kinase activity is required for the induction of ATF4 by
BRAF
V600
inhibitors, we treated A375 cells with 2μM dabrafenib or
4μM encorafenib for 6h together with GCN2iB, an inhibitor of GCN2 (
Fig. 2d
). Notably, GCN2iB is known to paradoxically activate GCN2
at low concentrations
59
, necessitating
use of a high 1μM dose to put GCN2 firmly into an inhibited state (
Fig. S2f
). Immunofluorescence analysis revealed
that dabrafenib or encorafenib co-inhibition with GCN2iB completely blocked induction of
ATF4 (
Fig. 2d
). Co-inhibition with GCN2iB also
reduced auto-phosphorylation of GCN2 and phosphorylation of eIF2α, but the results
were less strong, likely due to weak antibody signal in this context (
Fig. 2d
).
In a recent proteomics study, Eckert
et al.
performed
titrations of a wide variety of drugs in the Jurkat human T lymphocyte cell line
68
. Intriguingly, of the top 20 most
upregulated hits in response to dabrafenib titration, eight of them displayed biphasic
activation-inhibition. Among these eight proteins were classic GCN2/ATF4 targets including
asparagine synthetase (ASNS), sestrin 2 (SESN2), phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1),
and solute carrier family 7, member 5 (SLC7A5)
33
(
Fig. 2e
). Additionally, since
Jurkat cells do not have the BRAF
V600
mutation, but rather only wildtype BRAF,
dabrafenib is unable to elicit its on-target effects. We therefore hypothesized that GCN2
was being activated in an off-target manner.
BRAF
V600
inhibitors activate GCN2 via direct interaction.
Since the BRAF
V600
inhibitors did not spur a canonical activation of
GCN2 via amino acid depletion (
Fig. 2c
), we
hypothesized that these drugs may be directly binding GCN2. Three RAF inhibitors had been
previously tested against the kinase domain of GCN2 in the LINCS KINOMEscan database
(
Fig. 3a
): dabrafenib, vemurafenib, and sorafenib.
Notably, dabrafenib and vemurafenib displayed significant binding affinity for
GCN2’s kinase domain at the tested concentration (10μM) (
Fig. 3b
). Torin1, an inhibitor of mTORC1, is shown as a negative
control.
To further test for a direct interaction with GCN2, we performed an
in
vitro
kinase assay with full length GCN2 and eIF2α. Notably, we did not
add any tRNA to the reaction mixture. We observed a striking, biphasic phosphorylation of
eIF2α, in which lower concentrations of dabrafenib lead to phosphorylation of the
substrate, while higher drug concentrations inhibited GCN2’s kinase activity (
Fig. 3c
). Taken together, these experiments show that a)
there is a direct interaction between dabrafenib and GCN2 and b) dabrafenib can bypass
GCN2’s native regulatory mechanism to promote its activation without supplemental
uncharged tRNA.
We next tested the inhibitors’ abilities to activate ATF4 in a variety of
cell lines (
Fig. 3d
). We included three
BRAF
V600E
melanoma lines (A375, WM278, and SKMEL28) and two non-transformed,
BRAF
WT
lines (MCF10A and RPE-hTERT). Each BRAF inhibitor was tested at
1μM, which is within the ATF4-activating range for dabrafenib and encorafenib, but
below the activating threshold for vemurafenib and sorafenib. We reasoned that in the case
of a true off-target interaction, we would observe similar ATF4 induction in both the
BRAF
WT
cell lines and the BRAF
V600E
lines, despite the specificity
of dabrafenib, encorafenib, and vemurafenib for the V600 mutant. Indeed, we observed ATF4
induction with both dabrafenib and encorafenib treatment even in BRAF
WT
cell
lines. Additionally, in the BRAF
V600E
cell lines, 1μM vemurafenib was
able to ablate p-ERK signal while only slightly inducing ATF4, again supporting the notion
that ATF4 activation is not a direct consequence of MAPK inhibition.
Finally, we measured ATF4 induction by immunofluorescence in HAP-1 chronic
myeloid leukemia cells. As a haploid cell line, HAP-1 cells provide a simple genetic
background in which to generate CRISPR knockouts of proteins of interest
69
. We treated HRI, PKR, PERK, or GCN2 HAP-1
knockout cells
70
with increasing
concentrations of dabrafenib, encorafenib, and vemurafenib for 6h, and measured endogenous
ATF4 levels by immunofluorescence (
Fig. 3e
,
f
). All cell lines displayed biphasic
activation–inhibition of ATF4 except for the GCN2 knockout cells, which did not
induce ATF4 at any concentration of any drug tested (
Fig.
3f
). We thus conclude that GCN2 is necessary and sufficient for BRAFi-mediated
ATF4 induction.
Structural analysis reveals two distinct binding modes of RAF inhibitors with
GCN2.
To study the binding modalities of dabrafenib, encorafenib, sorafenib, and
vemurafenib to GCN2, we performed computational-based molecular docking studies to
facilitate an
in silico
screen. This work revealed two distinct binding
modes: an “outer” mode shared by dabrafenib and encorafenib, and an
“inner” mode exemplified by sorafenib and vemurafenib (
Fig. 4a
). These modes were distinguished by differences in active
site binding: dabrafenib was predicted to weakly bind Lys
619
in the GCN2 active
site through electrostatic interactions, whereas vemurafenib was predicted to have the
same Lys
619
electrostatic interaction in addition to multiple hydrogen bonds
with Cys
805
, Glu
803
, Asp
856
, and Phe
867
(
Fig. 4b
). Thus, drugs with the inner binding modality
(vemurafenib, sorafenib) would have much higher binding affinities due to increased
intermolecular interaction with the binding pocket. Accordingly, sorafenib and vemurafenib
were predicted to have significantly higher GCN2 Molecular Mechanics / Generalized Born
Surface Area (MM/GBSA)
71
scores than
either dabrafenib or encorafenib (
Fig. 4c
).
While drugs with the inner binding modality may bind with greater affinity, we
observe that their activation of GCN2 only occurs at high concentrations. This effect may
potentially be due to the kinetics associated with each binding mode – the inner
mode is a much stronger interaction, but would require very specific molecular
orientations to achieve, leading to a low k
on
, a low k
off
, and high
concentration necessary for activation. We would correspondingly expect a tight
concentration range over which biphasic activation-inhibition would occur, since a low
k
off
would ensure quick occlusion of both active sites once appropriate
concentrations had been reached. That is to say, the stronger the binding mode, the less
additional drug needs to be added to bind both of the dimer’s sites and inhibit the
kinase due to the low probability of drug dissociation from the initial binding site. In
contrast, the outer binding mode (dabrafenib, encorafenib) would not require such specific
molecular orientations and may have a correspondingly high k
on
, though the weak
interactions of this binding mode would facilitate a high k
off
. In this outer
mode, we would expect activation to initiate at lower concentrations but require a much
wider concentration range to reach full inhibition, as molecular exchange would be
frequent. Indeed, we observe an approximate 120-fold change in concentration necessary for
completion of the biphasic activation-inhibition curves of dabrafenib and encorafenib,
whereas we can extrapolate an approximate 16-fold delta necessary for completion of the
vemurafenib and sorafenib activation-inhibition curves (
Fig.
1d
).
In silico
drug screen suggests that multiple clinical kinase
inhibitors may inadvertently activate GCN2.
Recent literature has revealed that gefitinib, erlotinib, neratinib, dovitinib,
and adavosertib activate GCN2 in the biphasic manner characteristic of the described
off-target interaction
57
–
60
. Coupled with our finding that
BRAF
V600
inhibitors also non-specifically activate GCN2, we assessed the
potential breadth of this effect across clinical inhibitors used in the treatment of
cancer. By performing an
in silico
kinase inhibitor screen with the
Selleckchem FDA-approved & Passed Phase I drug library (3603 compounds), we identified
over 400 compounds that are predicted to bind GCN2 with a similar or higher affinity than
dabrafenib (
Fig. 4c
). Sorted by MM/GBSA, vemurafenib
and sorafenib both appear in the top 25 hits. In agreement with their differing binding
modalities, encorafenib and dabrafenib appear much further down the list (ranks 213 and
434, respectively). Gefitinib, erlotinib, neratinib, and dovitinib, all confirmed
activators of GCN2 in cell culture models, are all predicted to bind GCN2 with higher
affinity than dabrafenib.
The
in silico
screen reveals hits that include prevalent
clinical and research compounds with indications for treating multiple cancers, including
compounds utilized to treat and study sarcomas, neuroblastomas, lymphomas, and leukemias
(
Fig. 4d
). We identified and tested the abilities
of a number of identified inhibitors to induce ATF4 expression, including erlotinib and
gefitinib (EGFR inhibitors used to treat lung cancer), palbociclib (CDK4/6 inhibitor used
to treat breast cancer), and neratinib (pan-HER inhibitor used to treat breast cancer) and
found they all activate ATF4 in A375 cells (
Fig. 4e
).
Notably, our results in A375 cells indicate that gefitinib and palbociclib do not activate
GCN2 at patient-relevant concentrations, while both erlotinib (C
max
5.4μM)
72
and neratinib
(C
max
152nM)
73
do. Imatinib
and nilotinib also activate GCN2, but not at physiological doses (
Fig. S3a
). The results of this screen, coupled
with published GCN2 off-target data, implicate drugs across the cancer spectrum as
potential GCN2 activators.
GCN2 activation reduces cancer outgrowth and drug resistance.
Off-target effects can influence the efficacy of treatment for better or for
worse
74
,
75
. We thus tested the role of the GCN2 off-target effect in cancer cell
proliferation. When we examined patient C
max
values, we noted that dabrafenib
and encorafenib are used in the clinic near the peak-activating ATF4 concentrations that
we established in cell culture models here, as are erlotinib and neratinib (
Fig. 5a
). In wondering why so many clinical drugs were used at
near-peak GCN2-activating concentrations, we reasoned that higher drug doses would
systemically inhibit GCN2 across all of a patient’s cells, which may result in
severe generalized toxicity. Therefore, the maximum tolerated dose may, in these cases,
occur just before the initiation of GCN2 inhibition.
To test whether the off-target activation of GCN2 was beneficial or detrimental
to cancer cell outgrowth in drug, we began long-term treatments of A375
V600E
melanoma and PC9 EGFR
E746-A750del
lung adenocarcinoma cells. A375 H2B-mCherry
cells were plated in 96-well format and treated with the appropriate kinase inhibitor with
or without 2BAct (an inhibitor of ATF4 induction)
64
or GCN2iB. We performed full-well live fluorescent imaging to monitor
cell count over 4–10 weeks non-invasively. In A375 cells, we observed a marked
reduction in cell count in response to GCN2iB alone, but not in response to 2BAct alone
(
Fig. 5b
, top left). However, when we combined
GCN2iB with the clinical combination of dabrafenib/trametinib, we observed increased cell
outgrowth relative to dabrafenib/trametinib alone (
Fig.
5b
top right and
S3b
).
By contrast, dabrafenib/trametinib paired with 2BAct was not markedly different than
dabrafenib/trametinib alone (
Fig. 5b
, top right).
Perplexingly, we note that non-clinically relevant treatments with
dabrafenib+GCN2iB or encorafenib+GCN2iB (without MEK co-inhibition) are significantly more
toxic than dabrafenib or encorafenib alone (
Fig. S3c
–
d
). We speculate this difference may be due to
rapid rebound of MAPK activity (within days) when BRAF
V600
inhibitors are used
as a monotherapy vs. very slow rebound of MAPK activity when BRAF
V600
inhibitors are combined with MEKi. MAPK reactivation is necessary for mTORC1 reactivation,
which we have seen to be important for drug adaptation
17
. The interplay between mTORC1 and GCN2 signaling is complex and not
well understood and thus the causes, effects, and extent of the GCN2-mTORC1 interplay
remain open questions in the ISR field. These data would suggest, though, that GCN2
signaling can play an anti-proliferative role in a context with minimal mTORC1
activity.
In PC9 EGFR-driven lung cancer cells treated with the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib,
we observed the same trend, although these cells were not sensitive to GCN2iB as a
monotherapy (
Fig. 5b
, bottom left). By the 4-week
treatment point, wells treated with erlotinib + GCN2iB displayed increased outgrowth and
well-to-well variability relative to those treated with erlotinib alone or erlotinib +
2BAct (
Fig. 5b
, bottom right). We also observed the
same trend when testing the pan-HER inhibitor neratinib in PC9 cells (
Fig. S3c
–
d
).
We continued monitoring PC9 H2B-mCherry cell count for 10 weeks in each of the
treatment conditions (erlotinib, erlotinib+2BAct, erlotinib+GCN2iB). We arbitrarily
defined three bins into which we grouped each well at every timepoint: “sensitive
wells” (
Fig. S3e
top) that
had not completed a population doubling; “tolerant wells” (
Fig. S3e
middle) that had completed between one
and four population doublings; and “resistant wells” (
Fig. 5c
and
S3e
bottom) that had completed over four population doublings (
Fig 5d
). By plotting the number of wells of each treatment
condition in each bin over the duration of the treatment, we observed that wells in the
erlotinib + GCN2iB condition maintained significantly more proliferative inertia than
those in the other conditions (
Fig. 5e
). These wells
progressed away from the sensitive state (
Fig. 5e
,
top) and towards the resistant state (
Fig. 5e
,
bottom) notably faster than their erlotinib alone or erlotinib+2BAct counterparts.
Qualitatively, small islands of resistance can be observed developing and rapidly
expanding as resistant cells outcompete those that maintained sensitivity within the same
well (
Fig. 5c
and
S3e
).
We performed live-cell timelapse imaging of CDK2 activity to determine the acute
cell-cycle effects of GCN2 inhibition on A375 cells treated with dabrafenib/trametinib
(
Fig. 5f
). We observed a higher fraction of cycling
cells under dabrafenib/trametinib+GCN2iB cotreatment conditions compared to cells treated
with dabrafenib/trametinib alone or cotreated with 2BAct, mirroring the data in
Fig. 5e
. We found that GCN2-inhibited cells were more
likely to remain in the cell-cycle after the first day of dabrafenib/trametinib treatment,
and more likely to re-enter the cell cycle on the second day of dabrafenib/trametinib
treatment than cells treated with dabrafenib/trametinib alone. These data suggest that the
outgrowth observed in GCN2iB-cotreated cells is driven by a higher proliferative rate.
GCN2 co-inhibition may thus enable the development of resistant phenotypes by promoting
cell cycling and passage through S phase where many mutations occur.
Discussion
Herein, we describe the biochemical and biological impacts of an off-target effect
of multiple cancer inhibitors on the dimeric GCN2 kinase. Using scCRISPRi, genetic knockout
cell lines, GC-MS,
in vitro
kinase assays, and analysis of published data
sets, we show that GCN2 is responsible for the observed ATF4 activation via a direct,
off-target interaction between the BRAF
V600
inhibitors and the kinase. Our
results agree with the published mechanism in which at low concentrations, the drug
competitively interacts with a single active site of the GCN2 dimer. This interaction
induces a conformational change which results in an increased affinity for ATP in the
dimer’s second active site, triggering the kinase’s catalytic activity. As
drug concentration increases, both active sites become occluded, leading to inhibition of
the dimer
57
–
59
. In response to increasing concentrations of drug, this
mechanism results in a characteristic biphasic activation-inhibition curve of GCN2 activity,
which we measure by ATF4 expression. Direct GCN2
in vitro
kinase assays
mirrored the results of our indirect ATF4 induction assays by displaying the same biphasic
pattern in phosphorylation of eIF2α, GCN2’s best-characterized substrate that
is directly responsible for ATF4’s translational regulation. We further examined the
binding of these inhibitors with GCN2’s kinase domain computationally, during which
we discovered two distinct binding modalities of these inhibitors to GCN2. Importantly, it
appears that the binding modality employed by a particular drug may be predicted from its
GCN2-activating concentration. We observed that drugs predicted to use the outer binding
mode (dabrafenib, encorafenib) activated GCN2 at lower peak concentrations, but over a much
broader concentration range, most probably due to weaker intermolecular forces between the
drug and binding site. Alternatively, drugs employing the inner binding mode (vemurafenib,
sorafenib) activated GCN2 at much higher peak concentrations, but likely over a much
narrower concentration range. Correspondingly, these binding events were predicted to have
much stronger intermolecular interactions. Notably, an
in silico
inhibitor
screen revealed dozens of FDA-approved compounds that appear to share this off-target effect
on GCN2 at clinically relevant doses. Of the screen hits that we attempted to validate, all
showed some degree of GCN2-activating behaviors.
In the last few months, two collaborative bioRxiv preprints also identified an
interaction between RAF inhibitors and GCN2
76
,
77
. Via mutational and
structural studies, these publications detail the chemical interactions between RAF
inhibitors and GCN2, as well as the conformational and affinity changes to GCN2 upon drug
binding. Taken together, our combined work to this point establishes and confirms this
potent off-target effect, and provides the cell-based results needed for future
in
vivo
studies of the off-target effect on cancer growth and progression.
Here, we tested the consequences of the off-target activation of GCN2 on A375
melanoma and PC9 lung adenocarcinoma cell culture models in terms of cell outgrowth. We
found that co-inhibiting GCN2 (and thus mimicking the elimination of the off-target effect)
caused increased proliferation in A375 and PC9 cells, and cell outgrowth and resistance in
PC9 cells. This finding is in agreement with recent publications on GCN2-activating
drugs
55
and off-target activation of
GCN2 by the Wee1 inhibitor adavosertib
60
.
In that work,
in vivo
CRISPR screening revealed that off-target GCN2
activity sensitizes cancer cells to the anti-proliferative effects of the Wee1
inhibitor
60
. Similarly,
GCN2-activating agents are showing promise in clinical trials to limit tumor growth and
promote tumor clearance
55
.
According to the literature surrounding this off-target effect and our
in
silico
drug screen results, off-target activation of GCN2 may be unexpectedly
widespread across multiple cancer drugs used in multiple cancer contexts. As one of our most
ancient and evolutionarily-conserved kinases
78
, we speculate that GCN2 may lack the levels of specificity afforded to
more modern kinases, allowing for more promiscuous binding of drugs with varying chemical
structures. The breadth of this off-target GCN2 activation across cancer drugs presents
interesting therapeutic opportunities. While there may be contexts in which GCN2 activation
in cancer cells is detrimental to the patient, GCN2 activity presents as beneficial in the
drug and cancer contexts tested here. Activating GCN2, then, may be therapeutically
beneficial in such cancer contexts.
Modulating GCN2 activity, though, is not a trivial endeavor. Because of the
biphasic activation-inhibition activity observed with GCN2iB, the contrasting cellular
outcomes when GCN2 is activated or inhibited, and the fact that dabrafenib and encorafenib
reach most normal cells in the body in addition to melanoma cells, this off-target effect
may be limiting the patient maximum tolerated drug dose. Indeed, the doses used in the
clinic for dabrafenib, encorafenib, and erlotinib suggest that patient benefit is achieved
at doses
lower
than the GCN2-inhibitory dose, but within the activating
region. In the clinic, dabrafenib and encorafenib are combined with MEK inhibitors
(trametinib and binimetinib) to more fully block the MAPK pathway and improve
efficacy
79
. Patients benefit from
increased MAPK inhibition, but not at the cost of GCN2 inhibition. Dabrafenib or
encorafenib, therefore, cannot be dosed higher, and a secondary, non-GCN2-activating
inhibitor is added to the treatment (trametinib or binimetinib). It may therefore be a
beneficial therapeutic approach to combine targeted kinase inhibitors that
do
not
bind GCN2 with specific GCN2 activators (such as HC-7366, currently in
clinical trials). With this strategy, the targeted kinase inhibitors could potentially be
dosed higher, increasing on-target impact, while maintaining a GCN2-activation
phenotype.
In recent months, a pan-RAF inhibitor, tovorafenib, has shown promising phase I
results in BRAF-mutant melanoma
80
.
Notably, tovorafenib does not need to be combined with a MEK inhibitor, such as trametinib,
to achieve these outcomes. We have shown that tovorafenib does not induce ATF4 at
patient-relevant concentrations (C
max
9μM) in A375 cells (
Fig. S3f
). We speculate that the higher dosing of
this RAF inhibitor (perhaps partly due to lack of a GCN2 off-target effect) relative to
clinical standards dabrafenib and encorafenib may be contributing to its clinical effects.
Based on our results, it would be worth testing whether tovorafenib in combination with a
GCN2 activator provides an even more robust therapeutic response. If this concept shows
promise, we would posit that drug design should test for and exclude GCN2 binding to allow
space for a separate GCN2 activator in a combination treatment approach. Based on findings
from our computational screen, this approach could potentially benefit multiple cancer types
treated with targeted kinase inhibitors.
While prevalent in this paper as a marker of GCN2 activation, we note that ATF4
itself does not appear to be greatly affecting the outgrowth and resistance observed based
on the fact that inhibiting ATF4 expression using 2BAct (
Fig. S1f
) did not affect A375 outgrowth with
dabrafenib/trametinib and only slightly affected outgrowth in PC9 cells with erlotinib
(
Fig. 5b
,
d
–
f
). This finding is in line with a
current shift in thinking in the ISR field. While GCN2 is canonically known as the amino
acid deprivation sensor of the ISR, the field is beginning to understand an additional role
as a direct modulator of mTORC1 activity independent of ATF4 signaling
46
–
49
. We and
many others have demonstrated the importance of mTORC1 signaling in cancer proliferation,
drug adaptation, resistance development, and metastasis
17
,
81
,
82
. With the direct interplay of GCN2 and mTORC1 signaling coming to
light, as well as the identification of the GCN2 off-target effect in several drugs across
the cancer drug spectrum, we speculate that GCN2 may influence cancer outgrowth and
resistance in an mTORC1-dependent manner. The mechanisms of such an effect remain unclear,
though, and detailed signaling studies remain necessary. Future efforts will also be needed
to study the
in vivo
effects on cancer progression of enhancing or
suppressing the off-target activation of GCN2.
Methods
Cell culture.
A375 BRAF
V600E
human melanoma cells (#CRL-1619) were purchased from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). A375 cells were cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher,
#12800–082) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1.5 g/L sodium bicarbonate (Fisher Chemical,
#S233–500), and 1X penicillin/streptomycin, and grown at 37°C with 5%
CO
2
. The WM278 human melanoma cell line was obtained from Dr. Natalie Ahn
(University of Colorado Boulder). The SKMEL28 human melanoma cell line was obtained from
Dr. Neal Rosen (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center). WM278 and SKMEL28 cells were
cultured in RPMI1640 (Thermo Fisher, #22400–089) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1X
Glutamax, 1X sodium pyruvate (Thermo Fisher, #11360–070) and 1X
penicillin/streptomycin. MCF10A human breast epithelial cells (#CRL-10317) were purchased
from ATCC. MCF10A cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 5% horse serum,
20ng/ml EGF, 10ug/ml insulin, 0.5 ug/ml hydrocortisone, 100ng/ml cholera toxin, and 1X
penicillin/streptomycin. RPE-hTERT (#CRL-4000) were obtained from ATCC and grown in
DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 1x Glutamax, and 1X penicillin/streptomycin. HAP-1
human chronic myeloid leukemia cell lines (wild-type and knockout) were obtained from and
validated by Dr. Roy Parker (University of Colorado Boulder)
70
. HAP-1 cells were cultured in the same manner as A375
cells.
Cell line generation.
A375 cells were transduced with H2B-mIFP, DHB-mCherry, and UTR.ATF4-mCitrine
lentivirus (
Fig. 1
and
S1
), with CRISPRi-P2A-H2B-mTurqoise2 (
Fig. 2
and
S2
), with H2B-mCherry lentivirus (
Fig. 5b
–
d
and
S3
), or with H2B-mIFP and
DHB-mCherry lentivirus (
Fig. 5f
) as described
previously
62
. Cells stably
expressing these sensors were isolated by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS).
Single cell clones of ATF4-sensor cells and CRISPRi cells were acquired by limiting
dilution after a bulk FACS sort.
Small molecules.
Small molecules used in this study were: dabrafenib (MedChemExpress, #HY-14660),
encorafenib (Selleckchem, #S7108), vemurafenib (Selleckchem, #S1267), sorafenib
(Selleckchem, #S7397), trametinib (MedChemExpress, #HY-10999), TMP (ThermoFisher
#AAJ6305303), thapsigargin (Sigma-Aldrich, #0000192053), GCN2iB (MedChemExpress,
#HY-112654), erlotinib (MedChemExpress, #HY-50896), gefitinib (Selleckchem, #S1025),
palbociclib (Selleckchem, #S1116), neratinib (MedChemExpress, #HY-32721), 2BAct (Cayman
Chemicals, #37788), imatinib (MedChemExpress, #HY-15463), nilotinib (MedChemExpress,
#HY-10159), tovorafenib (MedChemExpress, #HY-15246).
Antibodies.
Primary antibodies and dilutions used in this study include: ATF4 clone D4B8
(Cell Signaling Technologies, #11815, 1:500 immunofluorescence, 1:1000 western blot),
phospho-ERK clone D13.14.4E (ERK1/2, Thr202/Tyr204, Cell Signaling Technologies, #4370,
1:1000 immunofluorescence, 1:1000 western blot), phospho-eIF2α clone D9G8 (Ser51,
Cell Signaling Technology, #3398, 1:1000 immunofluorescence), phospho-GCN2 clone E1V9M
(Thr899, Cell Signaling Technology, #94668S, 1:1000 immunofluorescence), histone H3 clone
96C10 (Cell Signaling Technology, #3638S, 1:2000 western blot). Secondary antibodies and
dilutions used in this study include: goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G
(IgG) secondaries linked to Alexa Fluor 546 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #A-11010 and
#A-11003, 1:1000 immunofluorescence), Alexa Fluor 647 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, no.
A-21245 and no. A-21235, 1:1000 immunofluorescence), or horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Cell
Signaling Technology, #7074 and #7076, 1:5000 western blot).
Immunofluorescence.
Cells were seeded on glass-bottom 96-well plates (Cellvis, #P96–1.5H-N)
coated with collagen (Fisher Scientific, #5005–100mL, 1:50 in PBS for 20–30m
at 37°C). −48h before drug treatment. For experiments involving co-treatment
with GCN2iB or 2BAct, cells were pre-treated with those drugs for 1h prior to addition of
the primary drugs. All titration experiments were performed with a treatment time of 6h.
Plates were fixed/permeabilized with methanol for 20m at −20°C. Blocking was
performed for 1h at room temperature in 3% BSA/PBS (w/v) solution. Primary antibodies were
incubated overnight at 4°C in 3% BSA/PBS solution. Secondary antibodies were
incubated for 2h at room temperature in 3% BSA/PBS solution. Nuclear staining was
performed with Hoechst 33342 for 10m in PBS (1:10,000 in PBS; Thermo Scientific #H3570).
All immunofluorescence images were obtained on a Nikon Ti-E microscope equipped with a 10X
0.45 numerical aperture (NA) objective. Immunofluorescence signals were quantified as
previously described
19
and as follows:
ATF4 (mean nuclear signal), p-eIF2α (mean cytoplasmic signal ), p-GCN2 (mean
cytoplasmic signal).
Single-cell CRISPRi.
scCRISPRi was performed using A375 cells expressing catalytically inactive Cas9
(dCas9) fused to KRAB and MeCP2 inhibitory domains driven off of the CMV promoter. H2B
fused to mTurqoise2 was driven off of the same promoter and separated via P2A peptide.
Cells were sorted by FACS into bulk positive populations, and then plated as single cells
by limiting dilution. Individual wells were expanded into clonal populations that were
used in experiments.
scCRISPRi cells were then transfected with plasmids containing sgRNAs (see
below, all sequences sourced from Guo
et al
.
24
) targeting the genetic sequence of the protein of
interest driven off of the U6 promoter. The same plasmids contained a second hPGK promoter
from which firefly luciferase was expressed. Transfection was performed using Fugene 6
(Promega #E2693). Per 10μl reaction, we used: 1.2μl of Fugene 6,
0.2μg of relevant plasmid, and Opti-MEM media (Fisher Scientific
#31–985-070) to 10μl. This 10μl reaction was added to 90μl of
full growth media (FGM, see
Cell Culture
) in one
well of an imaging plate containing 2000–3000 pre-seeded A375 scCRISPRi cells.
Non-targeting, or “scramble,” sgRNAs were used as transfection controls.
Cells were incubated in this reaction mixture at 37°C and 5% CO
2
for
48h, then treated with the relevant drug course. By transfecting in FGM, we maintained
cell viability while ensuring low transfection efficiency, allowing for computational
comparisons of transfected and non-transfected cells. After treatment, the above
immunofluorescence protocol was employed. ATF4 and luciferase stains were multiplexed,
allowing for identification of ATF4 levels in knockdown-positive and knockdown-negative
cells.
sgRNA Target
Sequence
HRI
GTAGCTGCAGCATCGGAGTG
PKR
GGCGGCGGCGCAGGTGAGCA
PERK
GCAGAGGCCGGGCTGAGACG
GCN2
GCAGCGCTGCGCCCAAGGCA
Scramble1
GTCCACCCTTATCTAGGCTA
Scramble2
GTGCCAGCTTGTGGTGTCGT
Live-cell time-lapse imaging and processing.
Cells were seeded on glass-bottom 96-well plates coated with collagen
24–48h before drug treatment as described above. Movie images were taken on a Nikon
Ti-E using a 10X 0.45 NA objective with filter sets appropriate to the employed
fluorescent proteins. Images were obtained every 15 minutes. Imaging was performed in a
humidified incubation chamber at 37°C with 5% CO
2
. Phenol red-free FGM
(Corning, #90–013-PB) was employed for time-lapse imaging (“imaging
media”) to limit background fluorescence. Time-lapse images were computationally
processed using our published EllipTrack software package, as previously
described
19
,
63
.
Live-cell outgrowth imaging.
Cells were seeded on plastic-bottom 96-well plates (Revvity #6055500) in imaging
media. Drug treatment was started on Day 0, and fluorescent imaging using the Revvity
Opera Phenix (5X 0.16 NA) was performed on Days 2, 4, and 7, then every 3 or 4 days
thereafter. Media changes/drug refreshes were performed every 2 or 3 days (always
immediately before imaging to remove debris). Cell count was determined using
Revvity’s onboard nuclear masking software, in which nuclei were masked based on
H2B-mCherry signal, and the total number of nuclear masks was quantified.
Statistics
For the violin plots, the median of the data is indicated by a white circle. The
25
th
through 75
th
percentile range is indicated with a light gray
bar through the center of the violin. The full data distribution is indicated by the
complete shape of the violin, with width corresponding to data frequency. Data plotted
throughout are representative of at least two independent experiments with at least two
technical replicates per experiment (see
supplementary data
document detailing the number of replicates for each
experiment). Statistical testing was conducted using MATLAB (violin analysis, two-sample
t-tests) and Excel (standard deviation error bars).
Western blotting and
in vitro
kinase assay.
Cells were harvested and incubated in ice cold RIPA lysis buffer with 1X
phosphatase and protease inhibitors (MilliporeSigma, #4906845001 and #5892970001) for 20m.
Lysates were resuspended by vortex, and subjected to sonication for 2m. Samples were
centrifuged at 20,000rcf at 4°C for 20m. Supernatant was harvested. Protein content
was determined via Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (#23227). Lysates were prepared for
SDS-PAGE analysis at 20μg per sample using NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (#NP0007).
SDS-PAGE was run using Bolt 4–12% Bis-Tris Plus gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
#NW04125BOX). Western blots were performed by transferring to iBlot 2 PVDF Regular Stacks
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, #IB24001) using the iBlot 2 transfer system. Membranes were
blocked overnight in 0.1X PBS/Casein (Bio-Rad, #1610783). Primaries were incubated
overnight at 4°C in 0.1X PBS/Casein with 0.1% Tween-20 (Fisher, #BP-337100).
Secondaries were incubated for 2h at room temperature in 0.1X PBS/Casein with 0.1%
Tween-20. Blots were developed with Radiance Plus (Azure, #AC2103) substrate and
chemiluminescent signal was imaged on an Azure C600.
GCN2 protein and eIF2α protein were purchased from Millipore Sigma
(#14–934 and #SRP5232–50UG). One complete
in vitro
kinase
reaction is as follows: 20nM TRIS pH 7.5, 200nM EDTA, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.5% glycerol, 10mM
MgCl
2
, 50μM ATP, 0.1μg GCN2 kinase domain, 1μg
eIF2α, indicated drug concentration, and water to 30μl total volume. The
reaction was run for 30min at 37°C. A quench was performed with 10μl of
200mM EDTA. 13.3μl of 4X LDS + DTT (200mM for 50mM final) was then added, and the
reaction boiled at 95°C for 10m. The above western blot protocol was then
followed.
Gas-chromatography mass-spectrometry.
A375 cells were cultured in 6-well format in FGM. At ~80% confluency,
cells were treated with the indicated drugs or switched into amino acid-free media
(USBiological, #D9800–27) for 6h. Cells were washed with ice cold HBS twice and
plates were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Metabolite extraction was performed as
described previously
83
. In brief, wells
with the same number of cells were extracted using ice-cold 80% methanol in HPLC-grade
water with 4 μg/mL norvaline internal standard (Sigma-Aldrich N7627). After
centrifuging the extracts at 21,000xG for 10m at 4°C, the soluble supernatant was
transferred to a fresh tube and dried under nitrogen gas. Polar metabolites were
derivatized by resuspending the dried sample in 24μL of 2% methoxylamine
hydrochloride in pyridine (MOX; ThermoFisher #TS–45950) at 37°C for 1h.
30μL N–methyl–N–(tert–butyldimethylsilyl)
trifluoroacetamide +1% tert–Butyldimethylchlorosilane (Sigma-Aldrich #375934) was
added and samples were heated to 80°C for 2h. The derivatized samples were analyzed
on a DB-35MS column (30 m × 0.25 mm i.d. × 0.25 μm, Agilent J&W
Scientific) on an Agilent 7890B gas chromatograph/Agilent 5977B mass spectrometer.
Metabolite ion counts were quantified by integrating GC-MS ion fragments for each amino
acid derivative (El Maven software v11.0, Elucidata), corrected for natural isotope
abundance using the R package IsoCorrectoR, and normalized to the internal norvaline
standard.
In silico
molecular screening and docking.
In silico
molecular screening and docking of the inhibitors
within GCN2 and BRAF were completed with the Schrödinger 2024–2 Suite, using
the Glide module
84
. The RAF inhibitors
were prepared along with BRAF
V600E
and GCN2 wild-type crystal structures (PDB
code: [4MNF] and [6N3O], respectively). The FDA-approved & Passed Phase I Drug Library
from Selleckchem was also prepared. The library was screened against the prepared GCN2
structure for relative ranking along with MM/GBSA ligand-protein energies. The RAF
inhibitors were docked into the BRAF and GCN2 structures at ATP active site (along with
ATP as a control) with Standard and Extra Precision (sorafenib was docked into CRAFWT, PDB
code: [3OMV], instead of BRAF). Two-dimensional plots, surfaces, and corresponding MM/GBSA
energies were then generated.
Supplementary Material
Supplement 1