Introduction
The
Nobel Prize-winning concept of click
chemistry, first proposed
by Sharpless et al.,
1
describes a class
of stereospecific reactions with a high thermodynamic driving force
under benign conditions that employ readily available reagents and
generate stable products in a physiological environment, which are
easily isolated and purified by affinity-chromatographic methods.
This pioneering approach of considering highly reactive reaction components
with narrow chemoselectivity profiles such that side reactions are
avoided, that is, the reagents “click” together akin
to a belt fastening mechanism, led to the discovery of a new combinatorial
style of chemistry that serves to achieve sequential transformations
of a broad scope. The copper(I) catalyzed Huisgen [2 + 3] azide–alkyne
dipolar cycloaddition has become the representative click chemistry
reaction following its independent discovery by Meldal et al.
2
(
Figure
1
A); mechanistically, the copper catalyst inserts into the
terminal alkyne to form a copper–acetylide complex, which is
then followed by the addition to the azide. Despite its robustness
as a click reaction, the toxicity of copper prevents its practical
use in living organisms. Nevertheless, a biologically sound alternative
was developed by Bertozzi et al.,
3
namely
a modified Staudinger reaction employing an azide and a triarylphosphine,
the latter tethered to a neighboring electrophilic trap to form a
stable amide bond via intramolecular cyclization with the aza-ylide
intermediate, thereby circumventing its hydrolysis. This reaction
was undertaken on sialic acid residues of glycoproteins on the surface
of living Jurkat cells, which were metabolically engineered to contain
an azide moiety. The visualization of the formed adduct was performed
due to the incorporation of a biotin residue onto the phosphine analogue,
thus enabling cell analysis via flow cytometry after staining with
fluorescein isothiocyanate–avidin (
Figure
1
B). The functional groups involved in this
process are abiotic, have finely tuned “click” reactivity
for each other, and simultaneously exhibit no interaction with the
preexisting functionality in the cellular environment. Bertozzi et
al. coined the term bioorthogonality to describe these considerations,
thus allowing for the use of the click chemistry methodology in living
cells as a powerful molecule-building tool. The world of applications
of the click chemistry methodology is vast, e.g., in protein target
identification,
4
visualizing cells, labeling
DNA,
5
,
6
protein assembly,
7
cellular signaling,
8
lipid messengers,
9
and targeting cancer cells.
10
Figure 1
(A) The mechanism of CuAAC, adapted from
Worell
B. T.
et al.,
Science
2013
,
340
,
457
–
460
23558174
10.1126/science.1229506
PMC3651910
. (B) Reaction of biotinylated (green) triarylphosphine
(black) with azide containing-sialic acid residues (purple) on the
cell surface via Staudinger ligation. Figure adapted from ref (
3
).
This Perspective addresses the pioneering tactics
of bioorthogonal
chemistry, comparing the historical research as well as recent advancements
in click reaction development to address the shortcomings of the former.
The bulk of the Review focuses on a selection of innovative applications
of these that play a significant role in drug discovery and development.
These, as well as future innovations, will continue to expand the
scope of click chemistry likely far beyond what was envisioned at
its conception.
General Methodology
The methodology
of employing click
chemistry within a cellular
environment follows a general outline, which involves the stepwise
incorporation of a bioorthogonal group onto a protein of interest
(POI) through biochemical means (e.g., expressed protein ligation,
11
metabolic engineering,
12
and tagging-via-substrate
13
) and its
subsequent site-specific reaction with a small molecular probe
14
via click chemistry (
Figure
2
).
Figure 2
Click reactions: (1) Staudinger ligation, (2)
CuAAC, (3) SPAAC,
(4) IEDDA, and (5) SuFEx. Figure adapted from ref (
16
).
Click
Reactions
The foremost consideration of this
process is the choice of click reaction, of which four types are most
widely used (
Figure
2
): the classic copper(I)-catalyzed Huisgen [2 + 3] azide–alkyne
dipolar cycloaddition (CuAAC), copper-free azide–strained alkyne
cycloaddition (SPAAC), inverse-electron demand Diels–Alder
(IEDDA) reactions, and Staudinger ligation. While the original Staudinger
ligation was the pioneering bioorthogonal click reaction, it posed
several shortcomings, namely the nonspecific oxidation of phosphine
reagents in biological systems and slow reaction kinetics, which hindered
its use in the tracking of faster biological processes.
For
comparison, IEDDA shows the fastest reaction rates (e.g., 2.2 ×
10
4
M
–1
s
–1
in MeOH),
followed by CuAAC (10–10
4
M
–1
s
–1
in DMSO/water). Moderate reaction rates were registered
for SPAAC (<1 M
–1
s
–1
in MeOH),
which places the Staudinger ligation as the slowest of the click reactions
presented here (<8 × 10
–3
M
–1
s
–1
in DMF/water).
15
To avoid this, higher concentrations of the phosphine reagent
can
be used; however, this increases the background signal in fluorescence
imaging.
16
Conversely, inspired by the
reduction of azides with triarylphosphines in water and their further
modification by the insertion of an electrophile (such as an ester
moiety) to yield stable amide products without a phosphine, the thus-termed
traceless Staudinger ligation
3
has become
the preferred alternative.
The most widely reported click chemistry
reaction within the cell
is the strain-promoted azide–alkyne cycloaddition (SPAAC),
thus circumventing the toxicity of copper as a catalyst
in
vivo
.
17
The azide is a popular
and functional bioorthogonal handle, as it is kinetically stable,
bioinert, and abiotic, and its insertion within a molecular target
does not cause structural alterations due to its small size. Moreover,
the strained cyclooctyne system can be further modified to improve
reaction kinetics with respect to CuAAC by introducing electron-withdrawing
abiotic substituents such as fluorine. An example of this approach
used difluorinated cyclooctyne, which dramatically improved reactivity
comparable to CuAAC for
in vivo
imaging of azide-labeled
sugars.
18
Further improvements to the hydrophilicity
of the cyclooctyne component were also achieved by considering an
innovative azacyclooctyne structure, 6,7-dimethoxyazacyclooct-4-yne,
synthesized by Bertozzi et al. from glucose. Thus, due to improved
bioavailability, nonspecific binding was minimized, resulting in an
enhanced sensitivity of azide detection.
19
It should be noted that there are restrictions in the use of SPAAC,
primarily due to the risks of the cyclooctyne reagents reacting with
cellular and plasma nucleophiles such as thiols, thus limiting the
type of targets.
20
The inverse electron-demand
Diels–Alder (IEDDA) reaction
of electron-withdrawing dienes (typically tetrazines) with electron-donating
dienophiles (e.g., alkenes and alkynes) provides a different alternative
to SPAAC, outperforming it with regards to reaction kinetics (driven
by ring distortion release and nitrogen production), better chemoselectivity,
and exceptional biocompatibility.
21
The
pioneering IEDDA reaction between 1,2,4,5-tetrazines (Tz) and
trans
-cyclooctenes (TCO) has been further improved so far
as to reach kinetics 10 000-fold those of CuAAC (with second
order rate constants up to 3.3 × 10
6
M
–1
s
–1
),
22
enabling ligation
at very low concentrations and overcoming issues such as rapid excretion
in vivo
;
23
therefore, it is increasingly
harnessed in nuclear medicine, with notable applications such as tumor
pretargeting
24
and biocompatible polymer
synthesis.
25
Notably, IEDDA also facilitates
the investigation of unsaturated free fatty acids in living cells,
as minimal structural alterations to the biochemical properties of
said lipids would be introduced. By modifying the reagent choice,
such as utilizing Tz and cyclopropenes instead of TCOs, fast ligation
kinetics were achieved, enabling visualization using live-cell microscopy
(Tz-fluorophore) and proteomic analysis.
26
Recent advancements in the development of click reactions
for fine-tuned
bioorthogonality and improved probe design span a variety of innovative
reactions, of which sulfur–fluoride exchange (SuFEx), developed
by Sharpless et al.,
27
is employed with
increased frequency (
Figure
2
). SuFEx involves sulfur(VI) fluorides, e.g., SOF
4
-derived iminosulfur oxidifluorides, which are stable
in
cellulo
but react with a range of nucleophiles to form S–N,
S–O, and S–C linkages in a click-like fashion, affording
combinatorial SuFEx libraries. Specifically, examples of biocompatible
SuFEx chemistry in dilute aqueous solutions and under mild conditions
of temperature and pH (25 °C, pH 7.3) were achieved. This powerful
technique has in recent years been used for drug design,
28
activity-based profiling,
29
and protein-targeting studies,
30
to name a few remarkable applications; moreover, these novel advancements
appoint SuFEx reactions as a favorable contender for DNA-encoded library
(DEL) technology, which will be presented in more detail in the eponymous
section.
Photo-Cross-Linking and Choice of Probes
This procedure
also generally employs
in situ
photoaffinity labeling
(PAL) to visualize and monitor specific proteins of interest (POIs).
31
PAL implies the formation of a new covalent
bond (“cross-link”) to proximal amino acid residues
on the POI as a result of photoirradiation of a photo-cross-linking
functional group (e.g., benzophenone,
32
aryl azide, and diazirine,
33
Figure
3
), generating a highly
reactive species that interacts spatioselectively with the probe,
which is a modified analogue of a natural binding partner (target
specific ligand) to the POI. The analogue is thus engineered to contain
a functional group able to perform click chemistry, as well as a reporter
group, which is a nonactive moiety that enables visualization of the
product, e.g., biotin or a fluorophore.
34
Figure 3
Mode
of action of different photo-cross-linkers: benzophenone,
aryl azide, trifluoromethylphenyl diazirine, and alkyl diazirine.
Figure adapted from ref (
34
).
The general criteria required
for a photoaffinity
probe (PAP),
aside from the ability to generate highly reactive intermediates upon
irradiation, lists several considerations: structural resemblance
to the pharmacophore target with similar affinity, leading to the
formation of a stable adduct, and critically a selective wavelength
activation that does not cause damage to the biological system.
35
Among the most common photoreactive groups,
benzophenone-based PAPs require activation with light at 350–360
nm, forming a reactive carbonyl triplet state that reacts with POIs
via a sequential abstraction–recombination mechanism, with
high affinity toward methionine.
34
,
36
Despite limited
protein degradation, the steric bulk of the phenyl groups could impact
binding to the respective targets, and the risks of nonspecific labeling
during the long irradiation times required may disfavor the use of
benzophenone as a PAP.
37
Similarly, aryl
azides (phenyl- and nitro-substituted) are activated by short-wavelength
UV (under 300 nm), forming nitrenes that interact nonspecifically
with target proteins
38
due to the risk
of rearrangement into azacycloheptatetraene,
39
inducing nonspecific labeling following reactions with other nucleophiles.
Instead, diazirine-based PAPs (notably trifluoromethyl phenyl diazirine)
may constitute a more favorable alternative, as they are inert toward
nucleophilic attack and have excitation wavelengths within 350–380
nm, which is not harmful; upon irradiation, they generate reactive
carbenes,
40
which achieve more specific
labeling due to their short lifetime, as only the desired target POI
lies within the required proximity for bonding.
41
Aliphatic diazirines do, however, have the caveat of being
less stable than their aromatic analogues, thereby causing nonspecific
photolabeling.
42
Among all three classes
of photo-cross-linkers, benzophenone has the distinct property of
allowing repeated photoactivation due to the formation of a biradical.
To showcase the versatility of this approach in chemical proteomics
studies, we will explore a few examples. For instance, Grubbens et
al. employed this methodology for the specific detection of proteins
interacting with the phospholipid bilayer by photo-cross-linking these
in situ
to engineered lipid analogues mimicking membrane
phospholipid phosphatidylcholine within inner mitochondrial membrane
vesicles of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
.
43
The analogues were designed to contain a photoaffinity
label (phenylazide or benzophenone) at the hydrophilic head of the
phospholipid and an azide functionality at the hydrophobic end, which
underwent click chemistry with a tetramethylrhodamine–alkyne
conjugate, allowing for fluorescence scanning of the adduct and subsequent
identification of separated POIs by mass spectrometry (
Figure
4
A). In addition to to applications
in proteome analysis, this methodology was also employed in state-of-the-art
protein assembly developed by Bertozzi et al.
44
Site-specific protein functionalization was achieved using the formylglycine-generating
enzyme (FGE), which oxidizes the sulfhydryl group within cysteine
residues of formylglycine (fGly) during protein expression in
E. coli
or mammalian cells. The resulting aldehyde functionality
was subsequently modified via reaction with an aminooxy reagent to
give a stable oxime. The aminooxy reagent used further served as a
small-molecule linker, as it was chosen to contain an azide moiety;
this functional group further reacted via SPAAC with a dibenzoazacyclooctyne
fluorophore conjugated onto a different protein. The specific synthesis
of heterobifunctional protein conjugates of significant complexity
was thereby achieved, e.g., a full-length human IgG coupled to either
human growth hormone (hGH) or to maltose-binding protein; the former
potentially improves the serum half-life of protein therapeutics,
while the former enables dual binding of a single molecule (
Figure
4
B, C).
Figure 4
(A) Engineered
phosphatidylcholine analogues containing an azide
moiety at the hydrophobic end, first photo-cross-linked to proteins
interacting with the phospholipid bilayer due to photoaffinity labels
present on the hydrophilic end. The adduct formed further underwent
CuAAC with a rhodamine–alkyne conjugate, allowing for fluorescence
scanning. (B) Site-specific protein functionalization was achieved
by the initial modification of the aldehyde moiety to a stable oxime
via a reaction with an aminooxy reagent containing an azide group,
which further reacted via SPAAC with a dibenzoazacyclooctyne fluorophore
conjugated onto a different protein. (C) Synthesis of heterobifunctional
protein conjugates achieved by employing the methodology illustrated
in (B) utilizing hGH- and hIgG-functionalized proteins.
Figure
4
. (A) Adapted from ref (
43
).
Figures
4
. (B, C) Adapted from ref (
44
).
Novel fluorophores, also coined click-activated
luminogenic fluorophores
(CalFluors), have since been developed by Bertozzi et al.
45
These are universal switches capable of being
internally quenched via photoinduced electron transfer in the azide
form but unquenched upon generation of the triazole. The core motif
is a 3-azido-4,6-dialkoxyaryl group, which when incorporated into
xanthenes (and functionalized with zwitterionic solubilizing groups
to obviate washing steps) generates a plethora of dyes emitting from
green to far red wavelengths, which are widely used in a variety of
in vivo
applications.
Applications
DNA-Encoded
Libraries
Lead compound discovery poses
a significant challenge in the field of drug development. Click chemistry,
due to its impressive specificity, has had a significant impact on
this process by advancing the screening of compound libraries as a
result of the ability to do so directly from within the compound mixture
through high-throughput methodology.
46
Recent
advancements in technological development of this kind have shifted
toward the use of DNA-encoded libraries (DELs,
Figure
5
). These are combinatorial libraries of molecules
that are of promisingly similar structure to drug molecules, each
with an attached “barcode” comprising a DNA sequence
that encodes the compound’s structure.
47
The advantage of this method is foremost the ever impressive diversity
and the efficiency of screening for ligands of a specific protein
target. Initial combinatorial biochemical methods such as phage display
48
or RNA display
49
emerged
as discovery methods for biopolymer ligands to biological targets
by using an environmental selection method analogous to that of biological
evolution: select species carry oligonucleotide “gene”
encoding the structure, which is thus used for its amplification;
sequencing the gene allows for species identification.
50
This has amassed significant interest toward
its potential broader scope within synthetic small-molecule drug leads,
which would increase current screening throughput within the pharmaceutical
industry by orders of magnitude; for scale, libraries with over 800
million-member DNA-encoded small molecules have thus been successfully
achieved.
50
DNA-based multistep synthesis
has been reported
51
via the formation of
covalent linkages between the encoding DNA and the small-molecule
building blocks (positioned appropriately through Watson–Crick
base pairing for single-stranded DNA templates
52
or through Hoogsteen base pairing within the major and
minor grooves to bind reactants, for double stranded DNA templates,
that are less likely to interfere with the binding to enzyme targets
53
). The limitations of reaction compatibility
with DEL technology (high yielding reactions, aqueous conditions,
high chemoselectivity) essentially align with click chemistry requirements;
in fact, CuAAC was first employed by Chen et al.
54
in this context, but further advancements have used CuAAC
for encoding tag ligation instead of enzymatic methods,
55
as chemical ligation offers more flexibility
toward sequence design. The stepwise example procedure (as a read-through
study) is shown in
Figure
5
A: following CuAAC, the oligonucleotide formed was labeled
with biotin at the 5′ end, and a complementary primer to the
3′-terminal region (Cy-5 labeled 17-mer primer) that underwent
extension by DNA polymerase I (the Klenow fragment was the most efficient)
was therefore attached. The removal of the triazole-linked template
strand further simplified analysis of the products by LCMS.
55
Iterative ligation afforded alternating azide
and alkyne tags while protecting the alkyne with the TIPS group; the
tags thus followed the motif 5′-azido-TXXXXXXXXXXXXXU-3′-propargyl-TIPS.
Therefore, templates with multiple triazole junctions were achieved
and further used in library synthesis, shown in
Figure
5
B: after chemical ligation with CuAAC, reductive
amination, removal of TIPS by TBAF, CuAAC tagging, and acylation with
bromoarylcarboxylates, Suzuki cross-coupling with boronate ester oligonucleotides
(extra tags were used to encode products of reaction failure) and
purification by reverse-phase HPLC yielded a 334 million compound
library, which was subjected to affinity-mediated selection against
the target soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), whose inhibitors could
have potential interest in the treatment of COPD, cardiovascular disease,
and even diabetes.
56
,
57
Generally, measuring the fidelity
of the reaction in DEL synthesis has been assessed using qPCR (to
quantify DNA post synthesis and detect DNA damage), HPLC (synthetic
yield), and gel electrophoresis (ligation efficiency).
58
Figure 5
(A) Scheme for substrate synthesis and read-through study;
following
CuAAC, the oligonucleotide formed was labeled with biotin at the 5′-end
and a complementary primer to the 3′-terminal region (Cy-5-labeled
17-mer primer) that underwent extension by DNA Polymerase I. (B) Scheme
of a chemical ligation-based library synthesis strategy; templates
with multiple triazole junctions were synthesized following the reaction
conditions outlined above.
One downside to this approach is that side reactions
with DNA tags
pose the risk of compromising the library selection analysis during
sequencing, as DNA damage could easily be achieved due to its reactive
components (e.g., reactive heteroatoms on nucleobases, nucleophilic
3′-OH, glycosidic linkage, phosphodiester backbone) as well
as harsh reaction conditions (e.g., high temperature, low pH) which
can lead to depurination and strand scission.
59
One way to avoid these consequences is careful consideration of
reaction step sequences in order to limit protection strategies or
change these (e.g., using TEA over TBAF in the deprotection of silyl
ethers)
60
to minimize the impact on DNA
amplifiability; using the click Staudinger ligation has been shown
to proceed with high yield and negligible degradation after overnight
incubation.
61
Another approach to
utilizing click chemistry as a tool in DEL
synthesis is the click-SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by exponential
enrichment) process, which is an adapted SELEX process by Mayer et
al., as a combinatorial technique to produce oligonucleotides (commonly
referred to as aptamers) that specifically bind to a target ligand.
62
In particular, the synthesis of an alkyne-modified
DEL was prepared by Mayer et al. through the replacement of thymidine
nucleobases with C5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) followed
by CuAAC functionalization with an azide component (chosen as 3-(2-azidoethyl)indole),
yielding a modified DNA library. This was subsequently incubated with
the target (chosen as cycle three green fluorescent protein (C3-GFP),
which allowed for direct visualization); the remaining unbound molecules
were washed away prior to the elution of the products with imidazole.
The resulting molecules were amplified by PCR with EdU, and the single-stranded
alkyne modified DNA was once again regenerated via digestion of the
products with λ-exonucleases (hydrolyzing the 5′-phosphorylated
strand of the double stranded DNA). The final step thus rebuilt the
starting DEL by reaction with the azide moiety, allowing for the continuation
of the cycle (
Figure
6
). This method avoids enzymatic incompatibility due to size restrictions
of larger nucleobase replacements. Following 15 completed selection
cycles, cloning, and sequencing of the DNA library, analysis was performed
on the resulting dominant sequence family using flow cytometry (using
5′-Cy5 fluorophore); remarkable specificity to the target was
observed, and SAR studies showed the dependency of binding on the
indole moiety. As this was introduced via CuAAC, Mayer et al. proposed
the term “clickmers”, thereby highlighting the importance
of click chemistry in the success of this approach.
Figure 6
Click-SELEX process:
alkyne-modified DEL starts the cycle, followed
by CuAAC, incubation with fluorescent C3-GFP, wash, elution, and PCR
amplification with EdU. Final regeneration of the library was achieved
via digestion with λ-exonucleases and azide incorporation. Figure
adapted from ref (
62
).
Further improvements to the outlined
procedure
were conducted,
as Seela et al. showed the possibility of partial oxidation of the
ethynyl-moiety under alkaline conditions to yield the corresponding
ketone, which is incompatible with subsequent click functionalization
and thus may lead to inhomogeneity.
63
As
a result, Mayer et al. modified the procedure to solid-phase synthesis,
with DNA undergoing CuAAC while still attached to the solid support,
followed by deprotection and purification; a full conversion to the
desired product was thereby achieved, thus describing a larger-scale
production protocol of nucleobase-modified nucleic acids.
64
Despite the orthogonality and high-yielding
nature of CuAAC, Cu(I)
has been shown to introduce oxidative damage to DNA,
65
which can be avoided by optimizing the ligands and reducing
agents employed. Specifically, utilizing an
in situ
reducing agent such as sodium ascorbate and chelating ligands such
as [tris(3-hydroxypropyltriazolylmehtyl)amine (THPTA) to improve the
water solubility and to capture reactive oxygen species has been shown
to improve CuAAC conditions.
66
Even further
optimizations to the ligand sphere, such as using a tris(triazolylmethyl)amine
ligand, e.g., BTTAA and BTTES, promote the acceleration of the cycloaddition
in living systems and improve the solubility of the catalyst complex
at physiological pH.
67
The issue
remains that the availability and diversity of azides
and alkynes starting blocks are not as prevalent in comparison to
amines and alcohols, for example; therefore, biocompatible SuFEx technology
may prove to be of interest in labeling DNA. An example of this endeavor
was accomplished by Sharpless et al.,
68
who proved the efficiency of a SuFEx reaction linking small molecules
to amine-tagged single-stranded DNA featuring a long chain primary
amine tail overhang and hairpin structure. Though few such instances
have been reported, the applicability of this approach is clear and
may be increasingly used in DEL synthesis.
Conversely, the PAC-fragment
approach, coined by G. Liu,
69
describes
a novel methodology featuring photoaffinity
labeling for screening small compounds or fragments against a target
protein. Contrasting with high-throughput screening of larger compounds,
low molecular weight structures are not sterically prevented from
binding while carrying photoactivatable moieties such as diazirine,
which is utilized to identify active sites. Essentially, photoactivated
covalent capture of DNA-encoded fragments identifies hits binding
to a target; each molecule in the library (synthesized using a split
and pool fashion) includes a DNA encoding system, a linker of variable
lengths containing the diazirine moiety, and a fragment potentially
capable of covalent binding to the target. PCR amplification and DNA
sequencing facilitate the identification of the fragments that successfully
bound to the target, similar to classic DEL methodology.
Antisense Oligonucleotides
by Click Chemistry
Antisense
oligonucleotides (ASOs) are synthetic short nucleic acids that can
alter cellular RNA and therefore impact gene expression by affecting
translation, thus targeting the source of the disease as opposed to
downstream effects.
70
Due to their sequence
specificity, selective inhibition of genes can be achieved, minimizing
toxic side effects and thereby making ASOs a promising avenue in the
development of personalized drugs, some of which that target a number
of genetic diseases have recently been approved.
71
,
72
However, advancements to this field are still being undertaken,
with significant improvements to therapeutic properties of ASOs spanning
modifications to the sugar–phosphate backbone adopted through
click insertion of triazoles, thereby increasing their stability toward
degradation and improving cellular uptake by reducing anionic charge.
Among the structures investigated, a 1,4-triazole (
Figure
7
A),
73
,
74
was successful at adopting the A-conformation required for RNA recognition;
further improvements to the base pairing around the click modification
included the addition of an aminoethylphenoxazine nucleobase (termed
G-clamp, promoting enhanced pairing with guanine,
Figure
7
B) at the 3′-position
of the triazole-containing nucleobase.
75
Introduction of a mismatch nearby strongly destabilized the DNA
duplex, which would suggest activity as a potential mismatch sensor.
76
Alternatively, modifications to the sugar moiety
of the DNA backbone with ribose analogues
77
or conformationally restricted locked nucleic acids (LNAs)
78
yielded similar outcomes, advantageously doing
so independently of the neighboring nucleobases. Conversely, enhanced
stability and stronger binding of DNA–RNA duplexes was observed
for the sugar modifications due to a stronger conformational lock;
moreover, both the G-clamp and LNA modifications in combination with
triazole insertion were successfully replicated by DNA polymerase,
thus making this class of ASOs a potential solution to diseases involving
issues in DNA amplification.
Figure 7
(A) Triazole-modified oligonucleotide successful
at adopting the
A-conformation required for RNA recognition. (B) Triazole G-clamp
including an aminoethylphenoxazine nucleobase, thus modified to improve
base pairing around the click modification base paired with guanine
in complementary DNA. (C) Triazole-modified oligonucleotide, the first
report of a synthetic DNA analogue with a modified backbone linkage
shown to successfully undergo RNA transcription. (A, B) Adapted from
Brown
T.
et al.
Chem. Rev.
2021
,
121
,
7122
–
7154
33443411
10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00928
. (C)
Taken from ref (
86
).
Introducing click-functional groups
in nucleic
acid scaffolds implies
synthetic routes modifying either the phosphate group, the 5′-,
3′-, or 2′-OH of the ribose sugar, or the C5 position
of pyrimidines. CuAAC is the preferred click reaction for this purpose,
thereby conjugating the alkyne onto the oligonucleotides and utilizing
azide-probes. Carell et al. developed a solid-phase synthesis utilizing
the phosphoramidite derivatives (as more stable phosphate esters)
of 2′-deoxiuridine-modified nucleosides 5-ethynyl-dU (dU
e
) and 5-(1,7-octadiynyl)-dU (d
U
°), which
were prepared by Pd-assisted Sonogashira cross-coupling.
79
The alkyne moiety was therefore introduced onto
the DNA structure at the C5 position of each deoxyuridine, and the
resulting 5′- dimethoxytrityl-nucleosides were reacted with
2-cyanoethyl
N
,
N
,
N
′,
N
′-tetraisopropylphosphorodiamidite;
a number of azide click partners were chosen (fluorescein azide, an
azido-sugar and a coumarin azide), illustrating efficient coupling.
80
However, the dU
e
group requires silyl
protection during phosphoramidite nucleotide synthesis, making it
a less favorable alternative to d
U
°; conversely,
dU
e
triphosphate is a superior substrate for DNA polymerases
(similarly to dNTPs) in the context of amplification of long DNA templates.
81
Further work on alkyne nucleobase derivatives
was undertaken by Seela et. al, who reported an increase in the DNA
helix stability following octadiynyl insertion with respect to an
ethynyl modification; moreover, the group also investigated a synthetic
derivative of the naturally occurring ribonucleoside inosine (7-alkynyl-7-deaza-2′-deoxyinosine)
due to its ability to form wobble base pairs at ambiguous positions
of tRNA anticodons (due to the lack of an amino group at the guanine
2-position), thus making it a “universal” nucleoside.
82
7-Deazapurines also showcased better stability
at acidic pH, which promotes them as candidates for DNA footprinting.
83
An alternative synthetic route to install the
alkyne moiety onto nucleobases circumventing Sonogashira cross-coupling
was developed by Hocek et al. by coupling a natural thymidine nucleoside
to flexible alkynes (e.g., the hydrophilic propargyl-diethylene glycol
(PEG) or hydrophobic undecyne (UN) linkers) via radical bromination
as follows: treatment of the diacetoxy-protected thymidine with
N
-bromosuccinimide (NBS) and azobis(isobutyronitrile) (AIBN),
followed by reaction with alcohol-derivatized PEG and UN linkers.
The resulting nucleosides were then deprotected and converted into
the triphosphate or phosphoramidite monomers for solid-phase synthesis
toward oligonucleosides.
84
Further
modifications to the phosphate backbone were explored by
Caruthers et al., in order to label specific positions therein, by
generating ethynyl phosphinoamidites; the alkyne moiety was similarly
functionalized via CuAAC with various azides to produce a substituted
1,2,3-triazolyl phosphonate-2′-deoxyribonucleotide internucleotide
linkage, which was found to be highly resistant toward 5′-
and 3′-exonucleases. This is advantageous for the main reason
that base pairing and hybridization remain unaffected by the triazole
insertion, as the nucleobases were not modified, allowing for a broader
scope of this approach.
85
The triazole–modified
DNA backbone motif was analyzed by
Brown et al. within the context of DNA-templated RNA synthesis to
assess biocompatibility.
86
Therefore,
in vitro
transcription of the modified oligonucleotide (
Figure
7
C) was successfully
carried out using T7 RNA polymerase, an enzyme commonly used in biotechnology
for the production of small RNAs. An
E. coli
growth
inhibitor (54-mer DicF sequence) was transcribed using two templates,
which were designed to include the modified triazole as a phosphodiester
surrogate at the 4- or 5-position of the T7 promoter locus or within
the coding sequence of the gene. The first template yielded no RNA
product, which was due to a possible steric disruption of the DNA–protein
complex; conversely, the second template yielded ∼80% of RNA
compared to native control, which was further proven by mass spectroscopy.
This first report of RNA transcription using a synthetic DNA analogue
with a modified backbone linkage serves as a starting point for investigations
within the RNA context and hopefully further into the production of
“clicked” antisense oligonucleotides.
Construction
of Protein–Drug Conjugates Using Click Chemistry
Targeted
therapies based on protein–drug conjugates have
increasingly attracted attention as promising alternatives to classic
anticancer drugs, as they involve the conjugation of cytotoxic drugs
to protein binders, thereby delivering the active antitumor agent
into specific cancer cells followed by drug release.
87
This significantly improves the therapeutic window due
to the increased potency and selectivity, as well as the delivery
efficiency.
88
The construction of protein–drug
conjugates employs a vast array of proteins; their natural cellular
modifications are exploited in order to enable enzymatic labeling
and further site-specific drug conjugation (
Figure
8
).
Figure 8
(A)
S
-Prenylation and click
chemistry methodology
employed in the synthesis of protein–drug conjugates: the repebody
engineered to contain a C-terminal CVIM motif was
S
-prenylated using FTase, followed by oxime ligation with aminooxylated
MMAF to yield a repebody derivative–drug conjugate. (B)
S
-Prenylation with the DARPins methodology: enzymatic labeling
of DARPins engineered with a C-terminal CVIA sequence to a C10-Azi
analogue by using PFTase and conjugation with DBCO-TAMRA using SPAAC.
(A) Adapted from ref (
104
). (B) Adapted from ref (
107
).
Among these, post translational
modifications (PTMs)
of proteins
occur as a means to enable or diversify their biological function,
cellular localization, and activity;
89
of
these, protein–lipid modifications describe the attachment
of hydrophobic molecules that carry out essential tasks (such as regulating
protein trafficking and mediating protein–protein interactions).
90
Cytoplasmatic PTMs of interest in this Review
include
N
-myristoylation (which describes the attachment
of the 14 carbon saturated fatty acid, myristic acid, on N-terminal
amines of glycine residues, forming stable and irreversible amide
bonds), as well as
S
-prenylation (involving the formation
of a thioether bond between an isoprenoid molecule and the thiol group
in cysteine residues in the vicinity of the C terminus of proteins).
In the former case,
N
-myristoyltransferases (NMTs)
catalyze the binding of the activated myristoyl-CoA form,
91
which causes a conformational change and subsequent
protein binding.
92
As there is no expression
of NMTs present in prokaryotes, they utilize host mechanisms to perform
N
-myristoylation during infection, which some pathogenic
eukaryotes also require, prompting interest toward pathogen-specific
NMT inhibitors to attenuate viral infectivity in the treatment of
disease.
93
,
94
As a key regulator in protein stability,
activity, and protein–protein interaction linked to immunity,
autophagy, infection, and cancer,
90
,
93
,
95
−
97
N
-myristoylation
and its accompanying research in the context of drug targets constitute
an important topic of interest. In fact, human and parasitic NMT-selective
inhibitors pose significant interest as drug targets against cancer
and even infectious diseases, such as malaria.
98
,
99
In this context, Tate et al. were the first to develop a labeling
method involving the incubation of azide-modified myristate analogues
with a peptide mimicking the N-terminal myristoylation target motif
Gly-XXX-Ser within the N-terminal region of the enzyme
Plasmodium
falciparum
ADP ribosylation factor 1 (PfARF1) and a catalytic
quantity of NMT cloned from
Candida albicans
(CaNMT).
100
The enzymatic reaction yielded an azide-functionalized
peptide, which further reacted via click Staudinger ligation with
a capture reagent containing a phosphine moiety and a biotin label,
allowing for visualization of the product following pull-down with
avidin-beads. Transfer efficiency was quantified by immunoblot to
be >99%, showing promise in proteomic applications and beyond.
S
-Prenylation involves the attachment of an isoprenoid,
either a short chain farnesyl (from the native farnesyldiphosphate,
FPP, catalyzed by farnesyltransferase, FTase) or a longer chain geranylgeranyl
group (from the native geranylgeranyldiphosphate, GGPP, catalyzed
by geranylgeranyltransferase type I, GGTase-I) to cysteine residues.
101
The FTase recognition sequence entails a terminal
CaaX motif, where “C” is the cysteine residue that is
selectively modified, “a” is aliphatic amino acids,
and “X” is an amino acid which determines whether the
protein is a substrate for FTase (X = Ala, Ser, or Met) or GGTase-I
(X = Leu, Ile, or Phe).
102
Small modifications
to the isoprenoid structure, such as the inclusion of bioorthogonal
groups (e.g., azides, alkynes, etc.), do not perturb enzyme activity
and allow for conjugation via click chemistry to different functionalities
depending on the application. Similarly,
S
-prenylation
mediates indispensable biological pathways and it is therefore involved
in numerous diseases, including viral, bacterial, and protozoal infections.
103
Hence, Kim et al. employed
S
-prenylation in tandem
with the click chemistry methodology in the synthesis of homogeneous
protein–drug conjugates.
104
The
procedure followed site-specific linkage of a toxic monomethyl auristatin
F (MMAF) (a synthetic antineoplastic agent currently in use within
the treatment of multiple myeloma) to repebodies (repeat antibodies,
i.e., protein scaffolds with high affinity for epidermal growth factor
receptor EGFR),
105
engineered to contain
a C-terminal CVIM motif (Cys-Val-Ile-Met, acting as a FTase recognition
sequence). This was utilized for
S
-prenylation, followed
by click-like oxime ligation with an aminooxylated MMAF (β-glucoronide
linked), thereby yielding a homogeneous repebody-MMAF conjugate (or
repebody derivative-drug conjugate, RDC;
Figure
8
A). This showed advantages in drug delivery
due to the stable oxime linkage as well as high efficacy toward EFGR-positive
cell lines and receptor-specific cytotoxicity; further, RDCs demonstrated
in vivo
antitumor activity in mice, though this was limited
due to the short half-life of the small proteins. Further antibody–drug
conjugate (ADC) synthesis and stability assessment was undertaken
by Shin et al.,
106
utilizing the same approach
outlined by Kim et al., and a HER2-targeting antibody (overexpression
of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2, is a marker
of breast cancer). Analysis of the drug content remaining in rat plasma
accomplished by LC-MS/MS showed a staggering 85%, and
in vivo
rat studies showed the half-life of the ADC was similar to that
of the market drug trastuzumab (Herceptin).
Further, Distefano
et al. employed
S
-prenylation
with a small protein scaffold (designed ankyrin repeat proteins, DARPins),
which was engineered to bind a breast cancer cell marker (epithelial
cell adhesion molecules, EpCAM) and also contained a CVIA motif (Cys-Val-Ile-Ala,
acting as a FTase inhibitor).
107
The isoprenoid
analogue was chosen to contain an azide moiety, which subsequently
underwent SPAAC with a dibenzocyclooctyne-functionalized fluorophore
(TAMRA-DBCO). The binding affinity of the resulting conjugate to EpCAM
was examined via flow cytometry, and it was found to be high toward
EpCAM-overexpressing MCF-7 cells, which is a promising result for
future use of this methodology in cancer research (
Figure
8
B).
Conclusion and Perspective
In conclusion, click chemistry
and bioorthogonal chemistry have
successfully become well-established methods due to their extreme
chemoselectivity and high reliability, highlighting the elegance and
accessibility of this Nobel Prize-winning approach. The breadth of
applications and widespread use in fields such as biotechnology and
healthcare indicate a promising outlook for the future of the pharmaceutical
industry and associated research.
Specific to the drug discovery
and development avenue, as well
as several branches of biochemistry, click chemistry has enabled significant
advancements in the study and exploitation of several areas of interest,
among which are the three explored in this Review (protein–drug
conjugates, antisense oligonucleotides, and DNA-encoded libraries).
The development of DEL technology within the context of lead compound
identification showcases it as a powerful tool, particularly for investigating
challenging targets with exceptional results, successfully returning
quality druglike compounds as a result of screening. Furthermore,
employing click chemistry with oligonucleotides has become a routine
protocol. As a result, the incorporation of the triazole linkage within
the DNA backbone was shown as a successful strategy within the context
of DNA replication, leading to the assembly of functional genes. Click
ligation of antisense oligonucleotides, with increased stability toward
degradation and improved cellular uptake as a result of triazole incorporation,
was used to selectively modify bases and nucleoside derivatives (LNA
and G-clamp) with subsequent enhanced target binding and mismatch
sensitivity. Further, the use of click chemistry alongside protein
lipidation was shown to be a powerful method for site-selective protein
modification, thereby allowing the construction of drug conjugates,
which hold exceptional promise in cancer research.
Future developments
of click methodology should aim to overcome
existing limitations in its widespread clinical use, such as often
mismatched physiochemical properties of compounds employed
in vivo
, which directly impact safety, pharmacokinetics,
and pharmacodynamics.
108
Given the rapid
advancement of this emerging field, careful studies are expected to
improve practical bioconjugation protocols to circumvent this issue.
An example of this kind of endeavor is click-initiated bond-breaking
reactions for drug release and delivery, and thus prodrug activation,
e.g., the reaction of an arylazido group with acrolein (overproduced
by tumors), generating an endogenous trigger in cancer cells.
109
Future Developments: Anticancer therapies
Click-to-release
is an ever-expanding space in the field in prodrug development, as
it allows for an exogenous trigger (enzymes such as esterases, small
molecules such as thiols, and nonchemical triggers such as UV irradiation)
110
to control the release of the active substance,
minimizing adverse side effects. For example, the delivery of the
cytotoxic drug doxorubicin was achieved by Brönstrup et al.
utilizing the trimethyl lock (TML) lactonization in conjunction with
IEDDA of a vinyl ether and a tetrazine.
111
Doxorubicin was conjugated via amide coupling onto the vinyl-TML,
which was then deprotected due to the addition–elimination
of IEDDA to reveal the free phenol and liberate the autoimmolative
TML core. This rapidly undergoes lactonization to the hydrocoumarin,
cleaving the amide bond and releasing the drug.
Exciting perspectives
include the use of click chemistry in personalized medicine, anticipating
the needs of patients suffering from currently terminal illnesses.
Specifically, novel modifications to the previously described site-specific
protein conjugation approach pioneered by Bertozzi et al.
44
show concrete promise in radiolabeling studies.
Thus, a radioimmunoconjugate with excellent
in vivo
behavior ([
89
Zr]Zr-DFO-pertuzumab) was recently advanced
to first-in-human clinical trials in patients with HER2-positive metastatic
breast, gastric and bladder cancer.
112
Furthermore, the direction of future progress of anticancer therapies
seems to reach beyond monospecific antibodies, with five examples
of bispecific antibodies approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
and European Medicines Agency as recently as 2021.
113
−
115
In order to access further advanced mechanisms of action, the generation
of multiprotein drug conjugates (with small-molecule attachments)
is necessary. For this reason, Bertozzi et al.
116
has developed a new method to synthesize functionalized
three-protein constructs, based on checkpoint inhibitory T cell engagers
(CiTEs)
117
with the addition of immunomodulating
proteins for enhanced therapeutic benefit; notable among these are
the sialidase enzyme, for removal of immunosuppressive sialic acid
glycans from target and effector cells, and an anti-PD-1 Fab checkpoint
inhibitor (where Fab describes antigen binding fragments of PD-1,
or programmed cell death 1, denoting a coinhibitory receptor expressed
on the surface of T-cells to negatively regulate immune response).
118
These constructs were achieved via tetrazine-bicyclononyne
strain-promoted IEDDA, with each CiTE containing a small molecule
also conjugated via SPAAC for imaging.
116
The future of cancer therapies seems to heavily rely on bioorthogonal
chemistry, which showcases the far-reaching impact of this promising
novel technology.