1
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM)
is a metabolic syndrome in which pancreatic
β-cells fail to meet the body’s need for insulin with
resultant hyperglycemia and increased risk of diabetic complications.
1
The IDF (International Diabetes Federation) Diabetes
Atlas 10th edition estimates that 536.6 million people globally are
living with diabetes (diagnosed or undiagnosed) in 2021, and this
number is projected to increase by 46%, reaching 783.2 million by
2045.
2
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
also known as adult-onset diabetes or non-insulin-dependent diabetes
is the most prevalent type of diabetes, accounting for around 90%
of all diabetes cases in the adult population characterized by insulin
resistance (IR) and insulin secretion defect.
3
T2DM is associated with abnormalities in energy metabolism arising
from increasing age, abdominal obesity, and unhealthy lifestyle.
4
Although the DM has been considered a major global
health problem, pathogenesis associated with T2DM is very complex
and not completely understood.
5
Thus, research
on T2DM management and treatment is now one of the most popular areas
of interests. Animal models of diabetes are very useful and beneficial
for biomedical studies, as they offer new insights into human diabetes
and assist in developing appropriate interventions that could lead
to clinical therapies. To date, rodent models which represent the
predominant species in biomedical research have already provided important
insights into disease mechanisms, but their predictive value for the
efficacy and safety of putative antidiabetic drugs in humans is limited.
6
Similar to humans, non-human primates (NHPs)
such as cynomolgus monkeys have an increased propensity to developing
DM spontaneously, particularly T2DM relative to increasing age.
7
NHP models show most of the same symptoms as
humans, and polygenic models may replicate human diseases. Therefore,
NHP models can be treated as a critical translational bridge between
basic studies in rodent models and clinical studies in humans.
8
Proteomics is an emerging tool that includes
a thorough study of
qualitative and quantitative profiling of the proteins present in
different types of clinical specimens, including body fluids (serum,
urine, cerebrospinal fluid, etc.), tissues, and cells.
9
It can be systematically characterized by a large scale
of dynamic changes in protein expression, which can provide fundamental
information for the study of various complicated diseases, which in
turn, allowing the capacity to unravel new mechanistic explanations
and offering a richer source of potential diagnostic and therapeutic
biomarkers associated with complex metabolic disorders including T2DM.
10
Furthermore, a data-independent acquisition
(DIA)-based quantitative proteomics technology has received much attention
in the recent years as it is a new tandem mass spectrometry method
that fragments and analyzes all peptide ions within a selected mass-to-charge
ratio range, even those with a low abundance. It also has significant
advantages for throughput, quantitative accuracy, and reproducibility,
which have been applied in research studies on biomarkers and basic
and clinical trials for various diseases.
11
−
13
The serum is
the most complex clinical specimen that can be easily obtained, and
most proteins secreted by cells are finally released into the blood
circulation.
9
Therefore, serum may contain
fundamental information related to the pathophysiological status of
all tissues and organs. Therefore, serum proteomic analysis is a valuable
approach for identifying protein biomarkers to be applied in the early
detection, diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment of various diseases,
including T2DM.
14
The primary objective
of the current study was to analyze the serum
proteomic profiles of spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus monkeys and
healthy controls using DIA-based quantitative proteomics technology
and identified protein components by showing different abundances
between the two groups. These global serum proteomic profiles will
provide fundamental information for further detailed investigations
of the molecular pathophysiological mechanisms of T2DM.
2
Materials and Methods
The overall workflow in this study
is presented in
Figure
1
.
Figure 1
Experimental design and workflow for the comparison of serum proteomic
profiles of spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus monkeys and healthy
controls using a DIA-based quantitative proteomics technology.
2.1
Materials and Sampling Procedures
Fourteen serum samples from three spontaneous T2DM cynomolgus monkeys,
combined with 11 matched healthy cynomolgus monkeys of similar age,
were enrolled in this study. The criteria used for screening of spontaneously
diabetic cynomolgus monkeys were guided by the American Diabetes Association
(ADA): FSG (fasting serum glucose) ≥126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)
and HbAlc (hemoglobin A1c) ≥ 6.5%. The FSG and HbAlc levels
of healthy cynomolgus monkeys are <101 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and <5.7%,
respectively. Prediabetes is an almost asymptomatic condition defined
as an intermediate state between diabetes and health. The clinical
characteristic and biochemical data of the 14 cynomolgus monkeys and
the monkey housing conditions have been documented in our previous
study
15
and are being followed in this
study. All experimental procedures and handling, care, and treatment
of the monkeys in the current study were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of Hainan Jingang Biotech Co., Ltd.
and were performed according to the guidelines of the Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. All serum
samples were collected, followed by immediate freezing, transferring
to the laboratory, and being stored at −80 °C before sending
to Shenzhen BGI Co., Ltd., for the follow-up DIA-based quantitative
proteomics tests and analysis.
2.2
Protein
Extraction, Quality Control, and Digestion
Approximately
100 μL of serum sample was transferred into
a 5 mL centrifuge tube, and 900 μL (nine times the volume of
the serum sample) of SDS-free protein lysate was added into the tube
for protein denaturation. The final concentration (10 mM) of DTT (Amresco)
was added into the sample and bathed in water at 37 °C for 30
min. After returning to room temperature, the final concentration
(55 mM) of IAM (Sigma) was added into the sample and reacted in the
dark for 30 min at room temperature. Most of the high-abundant serum
proteins were depleted, and low-abundant proteins were enriched using
the Cleanert-PEP (polar-enhanced polymer) SPE (solid-phase extraction)
column. The extracted and purified protein samples were further re-dissolved
using 25 μL of 50 mM NH
4
HCO
3
, vortexed
for 1 min, and then centrifuged for another 1 min. Finally, the protein
concentrations were determined with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
CA, USA),
16
and the purity of the extracted
proteins was verified by SDS-PAGE on 12% of gels, followed by Coomassie
blue staining.
As for protein digestion, each protein sample
(100 μg) was diluted four times using 50 mM NH
4
HCO
3
and then digested for 4 h at 37 °C in 2.5 μg of
trypsin (trypsin/protein = 1:40(v/v); Promega). Enzymatic peptides
were desalted with a Strata X column and vacuum-dried prior to the
MS process.
2.3
High pH Reversed-Phase
Separation
All samples were equally mixed, and the mixture
was diluted in mobile
phase A (5% ACN, pH 9.8) and injected onto a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC
system. A Gemini high pH C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm)
was used for liquid-phase separation of samples. Gradient elution
was applied with conditions described as follows: flow rate of 1 mL/min:
5% mobile phase B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 min, 5–35% mobile
phase B for 40 min, 35–95% mobile phase B for 1 min, flow phase
B lasted 3 min, and 5% mobile phase B equilibrated for 10 min. The
elution peaks were monitored at a wavelength of 214 nm, and the fractions
were collected every minute. Finally, the peptide components were
combined into a total of 10 fractions, which were then freeze-dried.
2.4
Data-Dependent Acquisition and Data-Independent
Acquisition Analysis
The dried peptide sample was re-dissolved
with mobile phase A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000
g
for 10 min, and the supernatant was taken for injection.
Separation was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC liquid chromatograph.
The sample was first enriched in the trap column and desalted, followed
by entering into a tandem self-packed C18 column (150 μm internal
diameter, 1.8 μm column size, and 35 cm column length). Peptides
were separated at a flow rate of 500 nL/min by the following effective
gradients: 0–5 min, 5% mobile phase B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA);
5–120 min, 5–25% mobile phase B; 120–160 min,
25–35% mobile phase B; 160–170 min, 35–80% mobile
phase B; 170–175 min, 80% mobile phase B; and 175–180
min, 5% mobile phase B. The nanoliter liquid phase separation end
was directly connected to the mass spectrometer, and the peptides
separated by the liquid phase were sprayed into the nanoESI source
and then allowed to enter a Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
San Jose, CA) tandem mass spectrometer for data-dependent acquisition
(DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) analyses.
The DDA
MS parameters were set as follows: ion source voltage 1.9 kV, MS scanning
range
m
/
z
350–1500; MS resolution
120,000, maximal injection time (MIT) 100 ms; MS/MS collision type
HCD, collision energy NCE 28; MS/MS resolution 30,000; MIT 100 ms;
and dynamic exclusion duration 30 s. The start
m
/
z
for MS/MS was fixed to 100. The precursor for MS/MS scan
was satisfied: charge range from 2+ to 6+ and top 20 precursors with
intensity over 5 × 10
4
. AGC was set as follows: MS
3 × 10
6
and MS/MS 1 × 10
5
.
The
DIA MS parameters were set as follows: ion source voltage 1.9
kV, MS scanning range
m
/
z
400–1250;
MS resolution 120,000; and MIT 50 ms. For MS/MS scan, the scanning
range
m
/
z
400–1250 was equally
divided into 45 continuous windows, and fragment ions were scanned
in an Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The MS/MS collision type
was also selected as HCD, and MIT was in the auto mode. The collision
energy was in the distributed mode: 22.5, 25, and 27.5, AGC was set
as 1 × 10
6
.
2.5
Protein Identification
and Quantitative Analysis
DDA data were processed and analyzed
by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30).
The peptide/protein entries that satisfied FDR (false discovery rate)
≤ 1% were used to construct the final spectral library, and
the retrieved database was Uniprot_mcf_irt.fasta (77,481 sequences).
Parameters are listed as follows: (1) enzyme: trypsin; (2) minimal
peptide length: 7; (3) FDR at the protein and PSM level: 0.01; (4)
fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); (5) variable modifications:
oxidation (M); acetyl (protein N-term); glutamine (Q) to pyro-glutamate
(N-term Q); and deamidated (NQ). The DIA MS data were analyzed by
the Spectronaut (version 12.0.20491.14.21367), which uses iRT peptides
for retention time (RT) calibration. Based on the Target-decoy model
applicable to sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass
spectra (SWATH-MS), the false-positive control was performed with
1% of FDR. Finally, the significant differences of serum proteome
were statistically analyzed by MSstats (version 3.2.1).
17
After carrying out error correction and normalization
on each sample, the DEPs between the groups were selected according
to the absolute value of fold change (|FC|) ≥ 1.5 and
p
value < 0.05 as the criteria for significant differences.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange
Consortium via the PRIDE
18
partner repository
with the dataset identifier PXD036971.
2.6
Bioinformatics
Analysis
Identified
DEPs were annotated and classified into the pathway by Gene Ontology
(GO) (
http://www.geneontology.org
) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) PATHWAY
database (
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html
), respectively. The possible functions of serum proteins were predicted
by Eukaryotic Orthologous Groups (KOG) software, and the WoLF PSORT
software was used to predict the subcellular localization of the identified
DEPs. The STRING database (STRING 11.0) was used to perform the protein–protein
interaction (PPI) network, which is important to deepen our understanding
of the pathogenesis of various diseases and hasten the appropriate
interventions.
2.7
Statistical Analysis
All data were
expressed as mean ± SD and analyzed using Student’s
t
-test to conduct the differences between the two groups.
The enumeration data were expressed as the number of samples and the
composition ratio and analyzed using either the Pearson’s χ-squared
test or Fisher’s exact test. Statistical significance was set
at
p
< 0.05.
3
Results
3.1
Characterization of Quantitative Protein Detection
DIA-based proteomic analyses of 14 serum samples of cynomolgus
monkeys were carried out in this study. As a result, 8658 peptides
and 1021 proteins were tentatively identified (
Tables S1 and S2
). After calculating the fold change and
P
value through the MSstats software package, 972 proteins
were further identified. Two filtration criteria (fold change >
1.50
or fold change < 0.67 and
P
value < 0.05) were
used to get significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).
Compared with the healthy cynomolgus monkey group (healthy group),
a total of 95 DEPs (including 9 DEPs with only one intensity in the
disease group) were detected in the spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus
monkey group (disease group), of which 31 were upregulated and 64
were downregulated (
Figures
2
and
3
and
Table S3
). Among the upregulated proteins, the ATP synthase subunit
b with a
P
-value of 3.6 × 10
–4
showed the greatest difference between the two groups. The ATP synthase
subunit b belongs to the mitochondrial ATPase complex catalytic core
to produce ATP and plays an important role in maintaining the energy
homeostasis in the cells. Among the downregulated proteins, protein
AMBP (α-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor) was the most different
protein with a
P
-value of 5.9 × 10
–4
. Protein AMBP is the precursor of α-1-microglobulin (A1M)
and bikunin, a protein involved in the scavenging and metabolism of
free radical and oxidizing residues.
Figure 2
Cluster analysis of the identified DEPs.
The
X
-axis of the graph is the sample names, and
the
Y
-axis is the protein names which can also be
downloaded from
https://www.uniprot.org/
. Since
several protein IDs are matching the same protein names, these protein
names are added with the protein IDs in the graph to distinguish from
each other. Heatmap showed the clustered data, where each colored
cell represents a protein abundance value. Black represents proteins
with a higher expression level, red represents proteins with a lower
expression level, and green represents proteins with an intermediate
expression level.
Figure 3
Volcano plot. The
X
-axis of the graph is the protein
fold change (T2DM/control) (log2), and the
Y
-axis
is the corresponding −log10 (
P
-value). The
red dots indicate the significantly upregulated proteins, the green
dots indicate the significantly downregulated proteins, and the gray
dots indicate proteins without significant changes. The protein names
of the top six DEPs based on the
P
value of upregulated
(ATP synthase subunit b, ribosomal protein lateral stalk subunit P1,
α-1,4 glucan phosphorylase, peptidyl-prolyl cis–trans
isomerase, β-mannosidase, and fibulin-1) and downregulated (protein
AMBP, leptin, serpin family A member 6, α-albumin, TTR, and
macrophage stimulating 1) proteins are marked on the figure, respectively.
3.2
GO Functional Annotation
of the DEPs
GO is an international standard gene function
classification system
that provides a timely updated standard vocabulary (controlled vocabulary)
to comprehensively describe the properties of genes and gene products
in organisms. Therefore, GO analysis is widely used to describe the
molecular function of protein sets. In the present study, we carried
out GO functional annotation analysis of the identified DEPs. Based
on these results, we generated GO functional classification maps to
discriminate the up- and downregulated proteins (
Figure
4
and
Table S4
). All identified DEPs were analyzed for GO annotation based
on the three categories of biological process (BP), cellular component
(CC), and molecular function (MF). For GO enrichment analysis for
DEPs, 24, 13, and 10 terms were participated in BP, CC, and MF, respectively.
In BP, DEPs were mainly involved in the cellular process, metabolic
process, and biological regulation. A total of 56 DEPs participated
in the cellular process and included 21 upregulated and 35 downregulated
proteins. In the cellular process, the most different protein was
ATP synthase subunit b with a
P
-value of 3.6 ×
10
–4
. In CC, DEPs were mainly related to organelle,
extracellular region, and extracellular region part categories. A
total of 62 DEPs were involved in organelle, with 20 upregulated and
42 downregulated proteins. ATP synthase subunit b with a
P
-value of 3.6 × 10
–4
was also the most different
protein in the organelle. In MF, DEPs mainly played a role in binding,
followed by the catalytic activity and molecular function regulation.
A total of 54 DEPs were involved in binding, among which 16 were upregulated
and 38 were downregulated. The most different protein was protein
AMBP with a
P
-value of 5.9 × 10
–4
in binding. In general, the DEPs from the serum samples of spontaneous
T2DM cynomolgus monkeys were participated in GO enrichment analysis
more extensively.
Figure 4
Up- or downregulation of differential proteins in GO punctuational
classification. The
X
-axis represents the GO annotation
entry and the
Y
-axis represents the number of differential
proteins with up- or downregulation.
3.3
KOG Function Classification of the DEPs
We predicted the possible functions of the identified DEPs and
generated functional classification statistics by using the Eukaryotic
Orthologous Groups (KOG) database, a database for the orthologous
classification of eukaryotic proteins. In our KOG functional classification,
all the DEPs were annotated into 23 KOG terms (
Figure
5
and
Table S5
).
The top-ranked functional clusters included four terms in cellular
processes and signaling group (signal transduction mechanisms, posttranslational
modification, protein turnover, and chaperones, defense mechanisms,
and extracellular structures), followed by two terms in the metabolism
group (carbohydrate transport and metabolism and inorganic ion transport
and metabolism).
Figure 5
KOG function classification of the DEPs. The
X
-axis displays the DEP count and the
Y
-axis displays
the KOG terms.
3.4
KEGG
Pathway Analysis of the DEPs
To explore the functions of
the DEPs in physiological or pathological
status, we conducted KEGG pathway analysis to further characterize
the biological functions of the identified DEPs. As shown in
Figure
6
and
Table S6
, the 95 identified DEPs were involved
in 35 pathways, among which the top 8 involving more than 10 proteins
were related to signal transduction, cancers, immune system, viral
infectious diseases, immune diseases, bacterial infectious diseases,
parasitic infectious diseases, and digestive system. All the identified
DEPs could also be further divided into six KEGG pathway classification,
including cellular processes, environmental information processing,
genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal
systems. According to the results shown in
Figure
7
, the upregulated proteins were annotated
to 13 major pathways. In turn, downregulated proteins were annotated
to 25 major pathways; the more proteins involved pathways were the
“PI3K-Akt signaling pathway” and “Epstein–Barr
virus infection”. Among them, thyroid hormone synthesis, starch
and sucrose metabolism, and carbohydrate digestion and absorption
were the top three biological functions for the DEP sets (
Figure
8
), and the most enriched
KEGG pathway was carbohydrate digestion and absorption.
Figure 6
KEGG pathway
classification of the DEPs. The
X
-axis displays the
DEP count, and the
Y
-axis displays
the name of biological functions which were classified into six KEGG
pathway categories, including cellular processes, environmental information
processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism,
and organismal systems.
Figure 7
Up- and downregulation
differential protein pathway classification.
The
X
-axis represents the pathway annotation entry,
and the
Y
-axis represents the number of differential
proteins with up- or downregulation.
Figure 8
Significantly
enriched pathway. This figure shows the metabolic
pathway in which the differential proteins are significantly enriched.
The
X
-axis shows the enrichment factor (RichFactor)
which represents the number of differential proteins annotated to
the pathway divided by all the proteins identified in the pathway.
The larger the value, indicating the greater the proportion of differential
proteins annotated to the pathway. The size of the circle represents
the number of differential proteins annotated to the pathway.
3.5
Subcellular Localization
of the DEPs
We performed WoLF PSORT software to predict the
subcellular localization
of the identified DEPs (
Figure
9
and
Table S7
) in the present study.
The results demonstrated that the extracellular, nucleus, cytosol,
and mitochondria were the most represented structures.
Figure 9
Subcellular localization
of the DEPs. The
X
-axis
represents the subcellular structure term, and the
Y
-axis represents the protein count.
3.6
Protein–Protein Interaction Network
of the DEPs
The PPI network analysis can provide valuable
information about the interaction between proteins and help to identify
core proteins. The interaction relationship of DEPs was evaluated
with the STRING PPI database, and the top 100 interactions with confidence
was used to construct the interaction map (
Figure
10
and
Table S8
), in which circled nodes represent proteins (red nodes represent
proteins with upregulation and blue nodes represent proteins with
downregulation), the size of the circle indicates the density of relationship,
and the connections between nodes represent protein interactions.
Figure 10
PPI
network of the DEPs.
The PPI network of DEPs
includes 39 nodes (8 upregulated proteins
and 31 downregulated proteins) and 58 edges (interactions). The hub
proteins were selected based on its relations with other proteins,
and several highly connected proteins were identified, for example,
macrophage stimulating 1(MST1), a liver-derived serum glycoprotein
involved in cell proliferation and differentiation, containing the
most edges and representing the top hug protein (highly connected
protein with 11 edges). Moreover, apolipoprotein C-III, transthyretin
(TTR), α-2-HS-glycoprotein, and serpin family A member 6 were
the other hub proteins with eight edges of each.
Furthermore,
while analyzing the Pearson correlation coefficient
and the significance testing between MST1 and FSG, HbA1c by the Statistical
Package for Social Sciences (SPSS 22.0 version), we observed that
MST1 was significantly negatively correlated with FSG and HbA1c (
r
= −0.782,
p
= 9.42 × 10
–4
and
r
= −0.821,
p
= 3.24 × 10
–4
, respectively) (
Figure
11
).
Figure 11
Pearson correlation
coefficient (
r
) and
p
-value (
p
) between MST1 and FSG (A) and
HbA1c (B) in 14 cynomolgus monkeys, respectively.
4
Discussion
Due to the increase in the prevalence
of DM globally, the diabetic
animal models are believed to play an important role in elucidating
the pathogenesis mechanisms and therapeutic agents of human DM and
its complications.
19
Preclinical studies
mainly focus on rodent models including rats and especially mice to
gain insights into the pathological mechanisms of DM. However, until
now, there is no single model which can mimic the development of DM
as in humans,
20
and nonrodent models of
DM are urgently needed as a valuable supplement to rodents for both
practical and physiological reasons with respect to humans.
21
Therefore, numerous lines of evidence highlight
the value of NHPs in bridging the translational gap between basic
studies in rodents and clinical studies in humans.
22
The NHP model such as the cynomolgus monkey can develop
T2DM spontaneously in an age-dependent way which is influenced by
overweight and obesity and is characterized by IR, progressive hyperglycemia,
and increased inflammation status similar to that observed in human
T2DM.
23
The human T2DM was previously
defined using FSG and 2 h serum glucose
(PPG) level measured during an oral glucose tolerance test. Although
these items have been considered the gold standard for diagnosing
diabetes, the disadvantages include the requirement of subject fasting.
Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) is accepted as the best marker of
mean glycemia level over the preceding 2–3 months,
24
and the main advantages of the test can be obtained
without fasting. Thus, HbA1c with a cut-point ≥6.5% was recommended
by the International Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification
of Diabetes to diagnose DM in July of 2009 and incorporated into the
2010 American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes.
25
Nowadays, the defined diagnostic criteria of
cynomolgus monkeys with DM have not been agreed upon.
26
−
28
Taking the translational medicine into consideration, our study
adopted the following T2DM definitions: FSG ≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126
mg/dL) and HbA1c ≥ 6.5%. In the present study, we found three
spontaneously type 2 diabetic cynomolgus monkeys within the relatively
small sample size which lend credence that a small percentage of cynomolgus
monkeys may develop T2DM spontaneously.
29
Proteomic studies would be capable of fostering a better understanding
of disease processes, develop new biomarkers for diagnosis and early
detection of disease, discover cellular pathways associated with the
disease of interest, and accelerate drug development.
30
As far as we know, this was the first DIA-based proteomic
analysis of serum samples of spontaneous T2DM cynomolgus monkeys compared
with healthy controls. In the current study, it is aimed to investigate
the characteristics of serum proteomic profiles between the two groups,
and the results evidenced the alterations of serum proteomic profiles
in spontaneous T2DM cynomolgus monkeys. As a result, a total of 95
DEPs were quantitatively identified, among which 31 and 64 proteins
were significantly upregulated and downregulated, respectively. Furthermore,
we compared the results with human studies and showed some similar
results that lower the level of TTR in patients with diabetes compared
with normal subjects, although the sample size is very limited.
31
We made an attempt to assign possible
functions to the 95 identified
DEPs using the GO functional annotation. The functional annotation
of gene products, both proteins and RNAs, is a major endeavor that
requires a judicious mix of manual analysis and computational tools.
GO is one of the most widely used tools for functional annotation,
particularly in the analysis of data from high-throughput experiments.
32
In the present study, we showed that the BP
of the cellular process, the CC of the organelle, and the MF of the
binding gained the highest counts based on GO term analysis. Furthermore,
ATP synthase subunit b was the most different protein both in the
BP of the cellular process and the CC of the organelle. ATP synthase
which is found in the inner membrane of the mitochondria is the central
enzyme of energy metabolism in most organisms.
33
In this study, as part of ATP synthase, ATP synthase subunit
b was upregulated in the serum of spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus
monkeys, implying that the pathogenesis of T2DM might be relevant
to the ATP synthesis and energy consumption. In addition, protein
AMBP (α-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor) was the most different
protein in the MF of binding. AMBP is a precursor protein processed
proteolytically into bikunin and α-1-microglobulin (A1M).
34
A1M is a conserved tissue housekeeping protein
secreted from the liver and most other epithelial cells, presented
in blood and all tissues at remarkably constant concentrations,
35
and has a physiological role as a protective
antioxidant, operating by clearing extravascular fluids of free radicals
and heme groups and transporting them to the kidneys for degradation.
36
In this study, protein AMBP was downregulated
in the serum of spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus monkeys, implying
that the pathogenesis of T2DM might be relevant to oxidative damage,
the result that is consistent with the previous research that decreased
oxidative capacity and mitochondrial aberrations are major contributors
to the development of IR and T2DM.
37
Furthermore, we also made an effort to identify the potential signaling
pathways that might exist among the DEPs using KEGG pathway analysis,
one of the most commonly used method for the integration and interpretation
of high-throughput proteomic and genomic data. In the present study,
we had discovered three signaling pathways, including carbohydrate
digestion and absorption, starch and sucrose metabolism, and thyroid
hormone synthesis showing significant enrichment. Among them, the
carbohydrate digestion and absorption pathway was the top enriched
KEGG pathway. The DEPs involved in this pathway included one upregulated
(ATPase Na
+
/K
+
transporting subunit α
4) and three downregulated proteins. Interestingly, all these three
downregulated proteins were α-amylase, despite the various sequences
of amino acids present in them. Na
+
/K
+
-ATPase,
a well-characterized membrane ion transporter composed of two functional
subunits (α and β) and one regulatory γ subunit,
38
plays a central role in the regulation of intracellular
and extracellular cations (i.e., low Na
+
and high K
+
) and cellular homeostasis. Impaired erythrocyte Na
+
/K
+
-ATPase activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis
of DM.
39
The relation of elevated ATPase
Na
+
/K
+
transporting subunit α 4 and decreased
erythrocyte Na
+
/K
+
-ATPase activity needs to
be further elucidated in future studies. α-Amylase is a hydrolase
enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of internal α-1,4-glycosidic
linkages in starch to yield low molecular weight products such as
glucose and maltose, causing postprandial hyperglycemia and blood
glucose levels to rise.
40
,
41
It is regarded as a
well-known therapeutic target for antidiabetic agents to design the
drug and provide an alternate approach for the treatment of T2DM.
Inhibition of this enzyme leads to inhibition of starch breaking and
results in lower levels of blood glucose.
42
Whether the downregulated α-amylase in the study was associated
with the overnight fasting status needs to be further studied. Additionally,
it is of note that the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway was involved with
top numbers of DEPs (11 downregulated and 1 upregulated), even though
no significant difference was observed between the groups (
p
= 0.26). Accumulating evidence has shown that the PI3K-Akt
signaling pathway plays a critical role in IR, and IR occurs in hepatic
cells when the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1)/phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) signaling pathway is downregulated.
43
,
44
Thus, the impaired PI3K-Akt signaling pathway caused IR and IR also
exacerbated the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Finally, the vicious circle
would lead to the development of T2DM.
45
It is well known that proteins usually do not work alone but
rather
interact with each other to perform various functions. PPI network
analysis approaches are a useful strategy for accelerating our understanding
of molecular crosstalk and the BPs underlying T2DM pathogenesis, especially
due to the complex nature of this disease. For the PPI network, hub
proteins are defined as the most connected nodes within the network;
thus, they are responsible to sustain network connectivity.
46
It is important to note that macrophage stimulating
1 (MST1) was the most important hub protein with 11 edges in the PPI
network in this study.
MST1, also known as macrophage-stimulating
protein (MSP) and hepatocyte
growth factor-like protein (HGFL), was originally discovered by Dr.
E. J. Leonard in 1976 as an endogenous serum protein that is mainly
secreted by the hepatic cells and is released into the circulating
blood as a biologically inactive pro-MSP, which is then cleaved by
various enzymatic systems to form biologically active proteins occurring
during blood coagulation and local inflammation.
47
Thus, MST1 has a chance to meet various cells via the circulating
blood and exhibits multiple biological functions, including promoting
migration and phagocytosis by activating macrophages and regulating
the inflammatory response of macrophages.
48
,
49
MST1 exerts its biological activities upon binding to its receptor,
the transmembrane tyrosine kinase Recepteur d’Origine Nantais
(RON; also known as MST1R) which is ubiquitously expressed in different
cell types, and is currently the only known receptor for MST1.
50
The MSP-RON signaling pathway exerts multiple
biological effects, including generating oncogenic variants and activating
downstream pathways, resulting in tumorigenesis, proliferation, angiogenesis,
invasion, and resistance to chemotherapy in various types of cancers,
51
exhibiting the anti-inflammatory and anti-lipogenic
properties by activating the AMPK signaling pathway in hepatocytes
and macrophages,
52
and suppressing hepatic
gluconeogenesis which is tightly balanced by opposing stimulatory
(glucagon) and inhibitory (insulin) signaling pathways.
53
Our present study demonstrated that MST1 was
downregulated in the serum samples of spontaneous T2DM cynomolgus
monkeys compared to the healthy controls and significantly high negatively
correlated with FSG and HbA1c, respectively. The results of the present
study are consistent with one human cohort study (the Cohort on Diabetes
and Atherosclerosis Maastricht (CODAM) study), demonstrating that
the serum MST1 level tested by ELISA was inversely associated with
the FSG concentration.
54
Taken together,
in view of the combined involvements in both suppression of inflammation
and amelioration of lipid–glucose metabolism, as a potential
candidate biomarker, MST1 has a significant research value and can
provide novel diagnostic and therapeutic target in the area of metabolic
syndrome, including T2DM. Furthermore, spontaneously diabetic cynomolgus
monkeys may be the suitable animal models to further evaluate the
precise role and the relevant mechanisms of MST1.
Additionally,
apolipoprotein C-III, TTR, α-2-HS-glycoprotein,
and serpin family A member 6 were the other hub proteins with downregulation
in the present study. Apolipoprotein C-III (apoC-III) is a small atherogenic
and proinflammatory protein that is synthesized predominantly in the
liver and secreted into the plasma and found on the surface of lipoproteins
(very low-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein and high-density
lipoprotein).
55
As a key regulator of plasma
triglyceride levels, apoC-III may also influence the risk of DM, not
only by causing hypertriglyceridemia but also by stimulating the apoptosis
of pancreatic β-cell, inducing IR, and promoting inflammation.
56
Human studies demonstrated that elevated apoC-III
levels were strongly associated with T2DM.
57
Our results were inconsistent with this conclusion, and the explanation
may be related to the normal plasma triglyceride levels in both spontaneously
diabetic cynomolgus monkeys and the healthy controls. TTR is a highly
conserved homotetrameric thyroxine transport protein synthesized predominantly
in the liver and choroid plexus and exists in the plasma and/or cerebrospinal
fluid of vertebrates and involved in the regulation of glomerular
filtration of retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) and in the maintenance
of the protein level in plasma.
58
,
59
Many human studies
have shown the association between plasma TTR levels and the risk
of T2DM, but the results were not consistent with each other; only
a few lines of evidence reported that the plasma level of TTR is high
in T2DM, but the relation with the diabetic condition is not clear.
60
,
61
α-2-HS-glycoprotein, also known as fetuin-A (Fet-A), is a
hepatic secretory glycoprotein and reversibly binds the insulin receptor
tyrosine kinase in the peripheral tissues, thereby inhibiting the
insulin-induced intracellular signal cascade and producing peripheral
IR.
62
Human prospective studies on Fet-A
and incidence of DM have so far yielded contradicting results; some
systematic reviews reported an increased risk of T2DM with higher
Fet-A concentrations, some other studies opposed the causality of
these associations. Serpin family A member 6 is one member of serpin
family (serine protease inhibitor), and serpins play significant roles
in numerous physiological processes and are known to control key steps
in the inflammatory, coagulation, and complement systems.
63
In sum, the possible reasons behind the contradicting
results involved in the human and cynomolgus monkey studies could
be possibly explained by the differences in species and sample size
and variations in detection techniques and analytical methods. Further
studies are required to resolve the contradicting findings and explore
the underlying mechanisms. Additionally, considering all the above
information, the DEPs discussed in the study demonstrated an important
role in the pathogenesis of T2DM and provided possible directions
for future research studies, including as potential molecular targets
for the treatment of DM.
Nonetheless, a few noteworthy limitations
of our study should be
recognized. First, due to the relative rarity of naturally occurring
DM in cynomolgus monkey colonies, the sample size of the study was
relatively small. Second, the differential proteins identified were
not confirmed with the alternative assays. Therefore, in the future,
studies with larger sample sizes should be conducted with permitted
conditions, and the targeted proteins are needed to be further verified
by other analytical methods such as ELISA assay or multiple reaction
monitoring, while the latter is increasingly gaining an advantage
over the former method because of its multiplexing capability.
64
,
65
Last, longitudinal studies may be followed up in pre-diabetic cynomolgus
monkeys to identify the predictive value of MST1 on progression to
T2DM.