Introduction
Rapid technological progress in liquid
chromatography separation,
mass spectrometry detection, and bioinformatics has enabled large-scale
detection and quantitation of proteins from cells, tissues, or biofluids.
1
Proteome analysis by liquid chromatography mass
spectrometry (LC–MS) creates new opportunities for biology
research.
2
The desire to expand the utility
of proteomics for clinical diagnosis
3
,
4
and drug development
5
leads to a need for faster mass spectrometry-based
proteomic methods. Separation by LC is a rate-limiting step in the
speed of proteome analysis; LC traditionally required at least 1 h
to separate a proteomic sample. With the emergence of new technologies
in recent years, researchers have pushed LC separation times below
1 h.
6
−
8
The logical extreme of this trend is to remove LC entirely
and
perform direct infusion mass spectrometry (DI-MS).
9
,
10
Theoretically,
there are two key challenges that limit proteome coverage by direct
infusion methods: (1) ion suppression due to different ionization
efficiency and/or different abundance of ionizable analytes and (2)
ion competition in the mass analyzer where the number of accumulated
ions for measurement is a finite value, which conceals low abundance
ions. Ion suppression may be addressed by improving the sampling efficiency
and increasing the ionization efficiency with low flow
11
−
13
or mobile phase additives like DMSO.
14
Ion competition is a problem for trap-type instruments. Quadrupole
selection before mass analysis partly eliminates the ion competition
effect, but quadrupole selection alone is not enough for extremely
complex peptide mixtures from the human proteome, which contain well
over 100,000 distinct peptide sequences including over 1000 unique
peptide precursors within a 4
m/z
window.
10
,
15
Ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) technologies have recently been
commercialized as a complementary mode of ion separation that could
reduce peptide signal complexity.
16
,
17
High-field
asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) is one such
technology that effectively acts as an ion filter. Other types of
ion mobility like structures for lossless ion manipulation (SLIM)
18
,
19
and trapped ion mobility
20
provide continuous
separation based on collisional cross section.
We recently described
direct infusion shotgun proteomic analysis
(DISPA) which achieves expeditious quantitative proteome analysis
using gas-phase separations by ion mobility and quadrupole selection
instead of LC.
10
In the original publication
of this method, we identified over 500 proteins and quantified over
300 proteins from 132 samples in under 3 min of data collection per
sample. In a subsequent paper, we showed how DISPA can enable fast
targeted quantification for specific proteins.
21
We further developed software called CsoDIAq to enable
analysis of DISPA data.
22
There are several
earlier examples of direct infusion proteome analysis,
9
,
23
−
26
including the creative use of tandem ion mobility spectrometry (IMS),
27
but none of these examples could compete with
the depth of LC-MS-based proteomics until recently.
Here, we
significantly improve the whole DISPA workflow applied
to human proteome analysis (
Figure
1
). We evaluated how the protein identification results
are influenced by various experimental parameters including mass resolution,
sample concentration, dissolution solvents, and ion mobility (FAIMS).
Using our recent software CsoDIAq along with optimized data acquisition,
we identified up to 35 peptides from a single scan, and a total of
over 2000 human protein groups from HeLa samples in one injection
of less than 1 μg of protein. The proteins we can now follow
by DISPA participate in diverse cellular pathways including central
carbon metabolism, DNA replication, RNA transport, protein synthesis,
and endocytosis. Additionally, a new label-free quantitative (LFQ)
strategy founded on fragment ion intensity enabled accurate quantification
of over 2000 peptides and ∼1000 proteins.DISPA-LFQ was applied
to a high-throughput drug response experiment with 293T cells grown
and processed in a 96-well plate. This work provides a complete guide
from experimental procedures to data analysis software, leading researchers
to easily perform direct infusion proteomics in their own labs. We
expect the DISPA-LFQ workflow for large-scale, high-throughput proteome
analysis will find widespread utility in a diverse array of applications.
Figure 1
Overview
of DISPA-LFQ using CsoDIAq software for peptide and protein
group identification and quantification. (A) Scheme showing our strategy
for peptide analysis by DISPA with FAIMS. (B) Schematic of a representative
targeted experiment with actual data. Peptides were directly infused
into the mass spectrometer over the duration of the experiment. Six
FAIMS CVs were selected sequentially, and within each CV, specific
m
/
z
regions were selected with Q1 before
fragmentation to produce chimeric MS/MS spectra. (C) Overview showing
identification and label-free quantification of multiple peptides
from one chimeric spectrum using the CsoDIAq software package with
the same real data example in (B).
Materials and Methods
Peptide Standards and Chemicals
Angiotensin I (Sigma,
A9650-1MG), QCAL Peptide Mix (Sigma, MSQC2), and HeLa digest standard
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog number: 88328) were dissolved into
different concentrations with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% formic
acid (FA). Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and deferoxamine mesylate salt
(D9533) were purchased from Sigma.
Cell Culture, Lysis, Digestion, and Desalting
For deferoxamine treatment, 293T cells were
cultured in Dubelco's modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing
25 mM
glucose, 4 mM glutamine, 1 mM pyruvate, 10% fetal bovine serum, and
antimycotic-antibiotic (Gibco 15240096). Thirty thousand cells were
plated per well in a 96-well plate and then allowed to grow for 24
hours before washing with phosphate buffered saline and lysis by the
addition of 8 M urea with 50 mM TEAB buffer at pH 8.5. The plate was
vortexed until homogeneous with lysis buffer and sonicated for 5 min
in a Covaris water bath maintained at 4 °C. After sonication,
TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific 77720) and chloroacetamide were added
to a final concentration of 10 mM to reduce protein disulfide bonds
and alkylate the free cysteines in the dark for 30 min. Then, lysis
buffer was diluted to 2 M urea using 50 mM TEAB, and catalytic hydrolysis
of proteins was initiated by trypsin (Promega Sequencing Grade Modified
Trypsin, Frozen) at a weight ratio of 1:100 protease/substrate. Then,
proteome proteolysis was incubated overnight at room temperature.
Peptides were desalted using a 96-well μElution plate from Waters
(Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate, 2 mg sorbent per well, 30
μm) and then dried completely in Speed-Vac. Peptides were resuspended
in ACN/Water/FA (50%/49.9%/0.1%, volume ratio) for DISPA. For the
preparation of the 293T proteome used for experimental parameter analysis,
lysis and digestion were conducted with the same protocol, but cells
were cultured in a 9 cm plate and desalted with Strata reversed-phase
cartridges (Phenomenex Strata-X 33 μm Polymeric Reversed Phase
30 mg / 1 mL, Tubes, 8B-S100-TAK).
DISPA Method
DISPA of the HeLa proteome was performed
on an Orbitrap Explois 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer
coupled with the FAIMS Pro Interface. DISPA of the 293T proteome and
deferoxamine treatment were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with the FAIMS
Pro Interface. A nano-ESI source (“Nanospray Flex”)
was used for sample ionization, and the nano-tip was pulled with a
laser puller (Model, P2000, Sutter instrument Co). Samples were directly
infused into a 50 μm inner diameter capillary tip that was packed
with approximately 2 mm of C8 particles (ESI Source Solutions, 5 μm
particle size) to prevent clogging of the tip. The ultimate 3000 HPLC
system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used to control the automated
sample loading, flow rate, and mobile phase composition. A flow rate
of 1.4 μL/min was maintained for the first 0.75 min to quickly
deliver the sample to the nanoESI emitter, and then, the flow rate
was dropped to 0.20 μL/min at 0.8 min for data collection. An
isocratic flow consisting of 50% ACN in 0.2% FA was maintained during
the whole acquisition time.
The working state of the nanospray
emitter, FAIMS module, and mass spectrometry was tested with 1 fmol/μL
angiotensin I using a compensation voltage (CV) of −55 V with
targeted
m/z
: 433 (charge state: +3) and HeLa proteome
infusion. The normalized TIC signal from two samples should be at
least 1E5 and 1E7, respectively. More method details for scouting
and targeted experiments are provided in the
Supporting Information
. The scan segment time and targeted window list
for HeLa are shown in
Table S1
.
Peptide and Protein Identification
Peptides and proteins
were identified with CsoDIAq software version 1.2 we developed previously.
22
CsoDIAq is a python software package designed
to enhance the usability and sensitivity of the projected spectrum–spectrum
match scoring concept.
28
CsoDIAq works
by comparing spectra in a library to experimental spectra and scoring
the presence of potential peptides. CsoDIAq also infers proteins from
peptides and estimates the false discovery rate of peptide and protein
identifications, and our new version also quantifies peptides and
proteins. CsoDIAq thus simplifies DISPA data analysis, enabling anyone
to perform DISPA experiments. The original Thermo .RAW files were
converted to mzXML files using msconvert.
29
mzXML files were input to CsoDIAq GUI with the default settings
except the initial fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Spectra
were searched against human protein library developed with SpectraST
in the TraML tsv format. Spectral libraries were generated from the
MS-Fragger
8
database search of data-dependent
acquisition (DDA) files data as described previously.
22
CsoDIAq produces three output files for each input mzXML
file that report spectra, peptides, and proteins filtered to <1%
FDR. In each case, CsoDIAq sorts peptide identifications by match
count and cosine (MaCC) score, calculates the FDR for each identification
using a modification of the target-decoy approach where FDR at score
S
= number of decoys/number of targets, and removes SSMs
below a 0.01 FDR threshold. The peptide FDR calculations only use
the highest-scoring match among all SSMs for each peptide. CsoDIAq
uses the IDPicker algorithm to identify protein groups from the list
of discovered peptides and adds them as an additional column in the
output. Detailed description about data processing, FDR calculation,
and protein inference was listed in our previous paper.
22
Peptide and Protein Quantification
MSconvertGUI (part
of ProteoWizard) was used to create mzXML files for quantification
analysis with a new LFQ version of CsoDIAq. Angiotensin and MS-QCAL
peptides were quantified using python to extract representative y-ion
fragment intensity. Peptides from the HeLa dilution series were quantified
using CsoDIAq to extract the sum of all detected fragment ion intensities
of common peptides in all input files.
Pathway Enrichment Analysis
The UniProt IDs from CsoDIAq
outputs were converted to gene IDs with DAVID.
30
The KEGG_2021_Human gene set library was applied, and pathway
enrichment analysis was done in Cytoscape
31
with the plugin ClueGO.
32
GO term/pathway
network connectivity (Kappa score) was set at 0.5. GO term grouping
and two-sided hypergeometric test were used and leading group term
ranked based on the highest significance.
Supporting Methods and FAQ Online
Supporting Information
contains more details about how to
generate a spectral library, how to monitor the instrument for quality
control, and a frequently asked questions section that addresses the
purpose of FAIMS, the volume of sample required, what is a projected
spectrum, how CsoDIAq determines matches, and the identification rate
of MS/MS spectra collected with DISPA.
Data Availability
All raw mass spectrometry data are
available from
massive.ucsd.edu
under MassIVE
MSV000089546 (
ftp://MSV000089546@massive.ucsd.edu
).
Results and Discussion
Peptide and Protein Identification with DISPA + CsoDIAq
DISPA involves nanoflow direct infusion of peptides and electrospray
ionization followed by gas-phase separation with ion mobility, quadrupole
m/z
selection, dissociation of peptides using higher-energy
collisional activation (HCD), and fragment ion detection by DIA with
high-resolution MS/MS (
Figures
1
A and
S1
). The performance of the
nanospray emitter, FAIMS module, and mass spectrometer are key metrics
for a successful DISPA experiment. The system was tested with both
1 fmol/μL angiotensin I and 0.125 μg/μL HeLa proteome
(
Figures S2 and S3
). The normalized TIC
signal from two samples should be at least 1 × 10
5
and 1 × 10
7
, respectively. After verification of
system performance with angiotensin infusion, we performed a peptide
discovery experiment where the isolation width of the quadrupole was
set at 2
m/z
and stepped across the
m/z
range of interest at each CV. Once we identify peptide targets from
a scouting experiment, we perform a targeted experiment only isolating
the combinations of FAIMS/Q1 isolation that produced peptide identifications
(
Figure
1
B). With DISPA,
only MS/MS spectra are collected, which are then identified by CsoDIAq
software including spectra–spectra match scoring, FDR filtering,
and protein inference (
Figure
1
C).
To better understand and optimize protein identifications
from DISPA with CsoDIAq, the effects of various experiment parameters
were tested with HeLa and 293T proteomes, including FAIMS CV, mass
spectrometer resolution, sample concentration, and ESI solvent. As
shown in
Figure
2
A,
more peptides were identified in CVs between −40 and −60
V for both samples. Identified protein groups demonstrate the same
trend as peptides in all CVs (
Figure
2
B). Theoretically, applying more CVs can enable us
to identify more peptides and protein groups. However, closer voltages,
such as −45 and −50 V, usually produce more duplicated
peptides and proteins, while voltages with a longer distance like
−50 and −80 V exhibit less duplicated peptides and proteins
(
Figure S4
). A parallel LC–MS/MS
experiment of the 293T sample with different CVs verified this conclusion
as well (
Figure S5
). Therefore, to reduce
duplicate detection of same peptides, we selected CVs from −30
to −80 V with steps of 10 V for all experiments in this article.
Figure 2
Protein
identifications from HeLa and 293T proteomes by DISPA analysis
across different experimental parameters. (
A
,
B
) Peptide (A) and protein (B) identifications at various FAIMS CVs
using DISPA for 293T and HeLa proteomes. Mass resolution: 120 K. Concentration:
293T: 1 μg/μL. HeLa: 0.5 μg/μL. (
C
,
D
) Number of protein identifications as a function
of mass resolution in HeLa (C) and T293 (D) with and without FAIMS.
(
E
,
F
) Number of protein identifications
as a function of sample concentration in HeLa (E) and 293T (F) with
and without FAIMS. (
G
,
H
) Number of protein
identifications as a function of resuspension solvent in HeLa (G)
and 293T (H) with and without FAIMS.
Increasing mass resolution from 30 to 240 k with
constant peptide
concentration increases the number of protein group identifications
three-fold in both HeLa and 293T proteomes (
Figure
2
C,D). This is likely due to an increased
ability to resolve fragment ions and the increased ion accumulation
time allowed while waiting for longer ion detection times. Similarly,
the number of identified protein groups increases as the sample concentration
increases in both samples (
Figure
2
E,F). However, the number of protein groups does not
increase infinitely as the concentration increases and the recommended
optimal concentration range for DISPA is 1–4 μg/μL
(
Figure
2
F). It is
noteworthy that we achieved ∼2000 protein group identifications
for both sample types with appropriate concentration and mass resolution
(1 μg/μL, 240 k), which is almost quadruple the 552 protein
identifications reported in the original DISPA paper.
More interestingly,
up to 35 peptides were identified in a single
scan of the HeLa proteome (scan #302,
m/z
= 700.5,
FAIMS CV = −40 V, 240 K, 1 μg/μL,
Table S2
), and nearly all of them showed excellent agreement
between the projected spectrum and library spectrum (
Figures S6 and S7
). This demonstrates the staggering amount
of information carried by a single scan, even after separations by
the quadrupole and FAIMS. We believe the combination of optimal data
acquisition settings with CsoDIAq software contributed to this improvement
in protein identifications.
Previous studies suggested that
different solvents are responsible
for altering the charge state distribution of peptides for ESI, which
may alter protein identifications.
14
Here,
the DISPA results showed that there are no significant statistical
differences among four kinds of tested solvents in both HeLa and 293T
proteomes (
Figure
2
G,H).
Protein identifications of DISPA with FAIMS and without
FAIMS were
also compared across all experimental parameters including different
mass resolutions, sample concentration, and resuspended solvent. Results
demonstrated that the identified protein groups increased at least
two times with FAIMS as an additional gas-phase separation (
Figure
2
C–H).
The peptide identifications of different experiment parameters
demonstrated the same pattern with proteins, namely, they increase
as the mass resolution and concentration increase, they decrease with
the removal of FAIMS, and they show no difference among ESI solvents
(
Figure S8
). The average peptides per protein
are at least three peptides per protein for both samples (
Figure S9
). Based on these results, we concluded
that the peptide and protein identifications benefit substantially
from a higher mass resolution, appropriate concentration range, and
FAIMS.
In addition to quantities of the protein, the rate and
robustness
of protein identifications are also key factors of this method. Specially,
we realized a maximum identification rate of 8.2 proteins per second,
but note that the total acquisition time varies greatly according
to different mass resolutions, which leads to a decrease in the protein
identification rate with the increase of mass resolution (
Figures S10 and S11
). Thus, there is a trade-off
between the number of protein identifications and the rate of protein
identification with our approach. Nevertheless, a compromise condition
is taken as an example, 1 μg/μL and 120 k, and a protein
identification rate of 6.3 proteins per second was achieved (
Figure S10
).
Next, the reproducibility
of peptide and protein identifications
was tested with replicates of all conditions. We tested the coefficient
of variation of each peptide across different concentrations, and
the majority peptides and proteins are below 30% (
Figure S12
). Moreover, the TIC figures showed great similarity
between two replicates (
Figure S13
, HeLa,
120 K, 1 μg/μL), and the mass spectrum of 12 randomly
selected scans also exhibited excellent reproducibility (
Figure S14
). We also compared the peptide identification
results of each target
m/z
scan segment in two repeats,
and results proved that 175 out of 769 scan segments demonstrate 100%
repeatability (calculated by shared peptides/sum of peptides) and
90% scan segments show more than 50% repeatability (
Figure S15
). The ratio of repeatedly detected proteins to
the average number of proteins in three replicates exceeds 80% in
all experimental conditions and some even higher than 90% (
Figures S16 and S17
). Detailed protein identifications
and repeatable proteins across different resolution and concentration
are shown in
Figure S18
. To conclude, we
believe that our method successfully balanced protein quantities,
speed, and robustness, but there is still space for improvement in
software and instrumentation.
KEGG Pathway Enrichment Analysis of Identified Proteins
Speed and quantity of protein identification are not the only relevant
metrics; in what biological processes do these proteins function?
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
analysis was performed on the 1628 common proteins found in three
replicates (1 μg/μL concentration, 240 k resolution).
The result revealed numerous important cellular pathways, including
central carbon metabolism (i.e., tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis,
pyruvate metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, glutathione metabolism),
protein synthesis and degradation (i.e., splicosome, ribosome, proteasome,
and proteome processing in the endoplasmic reticulum), and nucleic
acid replication and transport (DNA replication, RNA transport) and
endocytosis (
Figures
3
A,B and
S19, S20
). Interestingly, with
increasing mass resolution (and therefore also ion accumulation time
and sensitivity), the identified proteins in the above pathways also
increased (
Figure
3
C,D). In contrast, the gain in proteins for most pathways depended
less on the concentration of the peptide infused (
Figure
3
E,D). Protein identifications
from the less abundant pathways like endocytosis and protein export
did increase slightly as the concentration increased (
Figure
3
D). Our approach detected almost
two-thirds of the proteins in the TCA cycle and proteasome pathways.
This is nearly 3 times more TCA cycle proteins than the original publication
of DISPA, and we believe this significant progress will expand the
potential applications of this strategy.
Figure 3
KEGG pathway enrichment
analysis of proteins identified by DISPA
from HeLa cells. (A,B) The number in pie charts indicates how many
proteins in the pathway were identified, and the colored proportion
of each circle reflects the coverage of the proteins in each pathway
using a mass resolution of 240 K and a concentration of 1 μg/μL.
(C,D) Variation in the number of detected protein groups of various
pathways with different resolution settings using a sample concentration
of 0.5 μg/μL. (E,F) Variation of detected protein groups
of various pathways as a function of peptide concentration using a
mass resolution of 240 K.
Label-Free Quantification Strategy for DISPA
The DISPA
strategy produces only MS/MS spectra without retention time or elution
profiles to use for peak integration. The previous quantitative DISPA
approaches relied on stable isotope-labeled peptides, either spike
in or SILAC. Approaches that require stable isotopes are not ideal
for DISPA because they complicate sample preparation and require extra
time and effort, which is counter to the goal of high-throughput proteomic
analysis. To overcome these obstacles, we explored a label-free quantitative
strategy based on fragment ion intensity. DISPA showed excellent reproducibility
as measured by fragment ion intensity stability of angiotensin (
Figure S21
), MS-QCAL peptides
33
(
R
2
= 0.979), and HeLa peptides
(
R
2
= 0.997) (
Figure
4
A,B). Specifically, four fragment ions from
angiotensin I (y4+, b4+, b5+, b6+) demonstrated outstanding stability
during the whole acquisition time, and the fragment intensity was
proportional to the injected concentration (
Figure S22
). Further quantitative evaluation (using fragment ion b4+)
with concentrations across a 10
7
-fold (100 amol/μL–1
nmol/μL) range showed a great linear curve before reaching an
extreme high concentration (1 nmol/μL), and the quantification
curve was not significantly affected after the addition of 0.2 μg/μL
MQCAL peptides as an interference (
Figure
4
C). Similarly, 10 QCAL peptides across a
series of dilutions (15,625-fold, over four orders of magnitude, 320
pg/μL–0.5 μg/μL) illustrated an exceptional
linear curve (
Figure
4
D). The quantitative result was also tested with more fragment ions
from angiotensin I, and the results demonstrated that the quantitative
curve was not affected by the number of fragments used (
Figure S23
). These results suggested that LFQ
is possible from DISPA even from only one measurement per peptide.
Figure 4
Label-free quantification with DISPA using standards.
(
A,B
) Scatterplot of peptide fragment intensities from
two injections of the MS-QCAL protein (A) and HeLa peptides (B). (
C
,
D
) Quantification curve of a standard peptide
angiotensin I (C) and MS-QCAL protein (D) at different concentrations.
(
E
,
F
) Peptide (E) and protein (F) quantities
determined by DISPA-LFQ from a dilution series of the HeLa proteome.
The shaded area represents one standard deviation from the mean in
the middle. Only peptides or proteins with positive slopes were plotted
in either set, which excludes 60 peptides or 18 proteins before the
Pearson test for good slope (
p
value < 0.05) or
3 peptides and zero proteins after the Pearson test for slope (
p
value < 0.05). Significant peptides or proteins were
defined as those with a
p
value from the Pearson
correlation of less than 0.05. (
G
,
H
) Examples
of well-quantified peptide (G) and protein (H).
Encouraged by the above results, the DISPA-LFQ
method was further
assessed with a more complex human proteome sample analysis. DISPA
data was collected from HeLa peptides at four diluted concentrations.
Various parameters that influence the quality of peptide quantitation
were explored. The number of fragments used to quantify was important;
the most peptides were quantified with a good slope using at least
five fragments (
Figure S24
). We also found
the repeatability of identification to be a key predictor of quantification
quality. A total of 2321 peptides from CsoDIAq results were identified
in all 12 replicates from the dilution experiment, and CsoDIAq automatically
quantified them all. Of these, 1799 peptides had a positive slope
and p values less than 0.05 from Pearson correlation, or 78% of the
repeatedly identified peptides (
Figures
4
E and
S25
). The
shared peptides correspond to 1061 proteins, of which 905 exhibited
good linearity with p values less than 0.05 from Pearson correlations
(
Figures
4
F and
S26
). This indicates that over 85% of repeatedly
identified proteins were well quantified. Raw values of significant
peptides and proteins are provided in
Table S3
. The representative peptides and proteins from triplicate injections
are shown in
Figure
4
G–H. Based on these results, we further added this LFQ logic
and function into our identification software, CsoDIAq LFQ. In the
new version, CsoDIAq will automatically calculate the intensity of
all fragment ions from the identified peptides and then export two
quantitative files of peptides and corresponding proteins common to
all input files. The new LFQ module was added into our new graphical
user interface (GUI) (
Figure S27
). In this
way, even researchers unfamiliar with programming can easily use it
for rapid LFQ analysis of DISPA data.
Rapid Screening of Human Cellular Responses to Toxins with DISPA-LFQ
To demonstrate the capability of DISPA-LFQ for biological applications,
an example of a high-throughput dose–response assay with chemical
treatment (deferoxamine, DFO) was conducted using human 293T cells.
Notably, to match the high-throughput data acquisition method, we
designed an integrated sample preparation workflow including cell
culture, drug treatment, cell lysis, and digestion in a 96-well plate.
We applied six treatment groups with different concentrations of DFO
(from 10 nM to 200 μM) and two different control groups (with
and without DMSO). An average of ∼1100 proteins were identified
per well. Data collection from all samples required only 8 h of mass
spectrometry time (
Figure
5
A). Due to the extreme stress of high concentrations of DFO,
only 218 common proteins were quantified in all wells of the plate
that passed the quality control threshold of at least 1300 peptide
identifications. CsoDIAq analysis automatically generated a quantitative
report for those proteins (
Figure
5
B). DFO has been considered to be a chelating agent
used to remove excess iron or aluminum, which previously reported
altered quantities of glycolytic proteins. Quantities of the 10 proteins
from the glycolysis pathway were compared across groups. As shown
in
Figure
5
C–L,
all 10 glycolytic proteins exhibit a significantly upregulated due
to DFO stress versus controls when the concentration reached 100 μM.
Interestingly, the upregulated phenomenon of glycolytic proteins is
not significant in low-concentration DFO treatments (lower than 10
μM). Overall, together with the high-throughput sample preparation
workflow in a 96-well plate, the rapid DISPA-LFQ method is a promising
method for drug and biomarker discovery studies.
Figure 5
Rapid screening
of human cellular responses to toxins with
DISPA-LFQ.
(A) Scheme of the high-throughput experimental workflow
of cytotoxic stress response to deferoxamine in a 96-well plate. (B)
Heatmap of 218 common proteins detected in 82 wells. (C–L)
Glycolytic proteins quantified by CsoDIAq from DISPA-LFQ across different
concentrations of deferoxamine (DFO) vs controls. Con: No DFO treatment
without DMSO, Con (+): No DFO treatment with DMSO. Protein quantities
were corrected by the intensity ratio to histone H2A.
p
values are from one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post hoc
test. *
P
< 0.05, **
P
< 0.01.
The number of replicates for each group was between 6 and 12.
Conclusions
There are multiple competing fast proteomics
methods using LC–MS
that can achieve more than 2000 protein identifications with minutes.
7
,
8
,
34
−
38
However, time spent on sample loading, column equilibration,
and column wash may not be included in reported times. If all time
is counted, usually the maximum throughput for 24 h is less than 300
samples. For our method, the total time including sampling and data
acquisition is less than 4.5 min, meaning that DISPA-LFQ can collect
proteomes from a whole 96-well plate of drug screening application
in 8 h (
Figure
5
) or
approximately 300 samples/day. Moreover, taking advantage of no LC
column, the equilibration time and potential carry-over were eliminated,
and robustness was improved. More importantly, for certain applications,
once the target peptides or proteins are known, we can easily conduct
a target analysis of these peptide in seconds of time per sample without
waiting for elution of these peptides from LC.
21
In conclusion, the integrated DISPA-LFQ strategy
using CsoDIAq
software described here provides a complete high-throughput direct
infusion proteomic data acquisition and analysis platform. This method
enables up to 2000 human protein identifications and LFQ of up to
1000 human proteins with less than 1 μg sample consumption in
only a few minutes. This is nearly 4x identified and over 2x quantified
proteins compared to our original report.
10
As compared to the traditional LC-based methodology, this approach
has the advantages of speed and simplicity and has the potential for
higher throughput than competing LC–MS approaches. Finally,
an example application to high-throughput chemical response screening
in human cells grown in a 96-well plate validated quantities reported
from DISPA-LFQ by CsoDIAq.
In future iterations, we believe
this approach will benefit from
more efficient ionization sources, different types of ion mobility
selection, and faster, more sensitive mass spectrometers. We expect
this direct infusion proteomics platform will continue to improve
contributing to the high-throughput era of proteomics. We also expect
that with these developments in LFQ and software solutions, using
this work as a complete guide for direct infusion proteomic analysis,
DISPA can now be routinely applied in more practical applications
by researchers across the globe, such as clinical research and drug
discovery where analysis of thousands of samples is required.