Introduction
Glycosylation is an important post-translational
modification (PTM)
mechanism of proteins, which modulates the protein function and is
implicated in protein folding, trafficking, and cell-to-cell communications.
1
Dynamic changes in glycosylation states have
been associated with different disease processes, such as cancer,
2
viral infection responses,
3
and Alzheimer’s disease;
4
the extent of the glycosylation could be associated with the disease
progression
5
and prognosis.
6
These observed associations indicate that the specific
glycosylation states of proteins can be utilized as biomarkers for
clinical diagnosis
7
and disease monitoring.
8
Currently, measurement of clinically adopted
cancer protein biomarkers is mostly performed using affinity-based
techniques.
9
These methods can at times
suffer from poor specificity and accuracy and cannot distinguish between
closely related proteoforms corresponding to different glycosylation
modifications; this may limit their diagnostic accuracy and value.
Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is an established circulating cancer biomarker
implicated in multiple neoplastic malignancies, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and nonseminomatous testicular tumors.
10
,
11
AFP is a glycoprotein predominantly expressed in the embryonic yolk
sac and fetal liver, and its elevation as a circulating biomarker
can be observed in liver cirrhosis, during pregnancy, and in neonates.
12
Mature AFP has a single-consensus N-linked glycosylation
site at Asparagine 251 (N251); a high degree of structural variation
in glycan structures has been identified in serum samples.
11
,
13
−
15
There was limited evidence suggesting a possible
O-glycosylation site within AFP based on the cell culture study;
16
however, AFP O-glycosylation has not been confirmed
in authentic serum samples. In addition to glycosylation, six putative
phosphorylation sites in AFP have been reported.
17
The existence of different isoforms of post-translationally
modified AFP was first described by Taketa and Hirari, who found different
forms of glycosylated AFP in patients with benign and malignant diseases.
18
AFP glycoforms sharing a core fucosylation structure
(AFP-L3) are used clinically as a biomarker to predict the risk of
developing HCC
11
and to monitor its recurrence
in patients with impaired liver function. Commonly used methodology
to measure the relative abundance of AFP-L3 glycoforms is lectin-binding
gel shift electrophoresis (GSE). Lens culinaris agglutinin (LCA) is
a type of lectin, which can bind specifically to the core fucosylation
(α-linked fucose residue attached to N-acetylglucosamine) moiety.
Electrophoresis-based methods utilizing LCA binding can identify AFP-L3;
however, they do not provide insights into structural variations of
AFP glycoforms beyond the core fucosylation site.
Several liquid
chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)
methods have been developed to profile and identify different glycoforms
of AFP, which are based on quantification of AFP-specific glycopeptides
through digestion of proteins enriched from plasma or serum samples.
14
,
19
,
20
These methods utilize glycopeptides
representing the AFP glycoforms without core fucosylation (AFP-L1)
and with core fucosylation (AFP-L3) to calculate the relative abundance
of AFP-L3 glycoforms (AFP-L3%). Other studies also utilized enzymes
and chemical treatment to release glycans from AFP and identified
the glycan structure by electrospray ionization (ESI) and matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) coupled with MS.
13
,
21
,
22
During MS analysis, glycans and
glycopeptides require different collision energies for structure and
sequence identification based on fragmentation. Certain glycan structures,
such as sialic acids, require further derivatization or permethylation
prior to MS analysis due to their heat labile nature.
Different
from electrophoresis and glycan- or glycopeptide-based
MS approaches, intact protein analysis using liquid chromatography
coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC–HRMS) can
directly profile different AFP proteoforms, including glycosylation.
Potential advantages of intact protein methods include faster and
less complex sample preparation (relative to released glycan- or glycopeptide-based
MS), and more straightforward data analysis. Compared to the electrophoresis-based
methods, masses of intact AFP proteoforms can be used to differentiate
and identify post-translational modifications in their native states
beyond the glycan core fucosylation site.
14
,
23
Here, we describe an analytical method for AFP glycoform analysis
that utilizes AFP-specific immune enrichment, followed by LC–HRMS
analysis to differentiate and quantitate the relative abundance of
AFP glycoforms. Based on the identified AFP proteoforms and the presence
of core fucose, we further categorize different glycoforms to AFP-L1
and AFP-L3. We evaluated the performance of the analytical method,
applied the method to analyze authentic patient samples, and compared
AFP-L3% results quantified from the developed LC–HRMS approach
and a commercial GSE method.
Experimental Section
Standards and Reagents
AFP purified from human umbilical
cord blood was purchased from Lee Biosolutions (Maryland Heights,
MO); monoclonal rabbit anti-AFP antibody and magnetic beads coated
with anti-rabbit IgG antibodies were purchased from Thermo Fisher
Scientific (Waltham, MA) and Eurofins Abraxis (Warminster, PA) respectively.
Formic acid, glycine, and 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) were purchased from MilliporeSigma (St. Louis, MO); acetonitrile
was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). All other reagents
were of the highest purity grade commercially available.
AFP-Specific Immune Enrichment from Serum Samples
Serum
samples (500 μL) were aliquoted in 1.5 mL LoBind tubes (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany); 500 μL of HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) and 5 μL
of anti-AFP antibody (rabbit monoclonal antibody (3)) were added to
the samples and the samples were incubated at 10 °C for 1 h (with
mixing, at 1100 rpm) on a thermomixer (Eppendorf). After incubation,
5 μL of magnetic beads coated with anti-rabbit IgG antibody
were added to the samples, and the samples were incubated at 10 °C
for 1 h (with mixing at 1100 rpm). After incubation, the tubes were
placed in a magnetic rack for 20 min to separate the magnetic beads
from the supernatants, and the supernatants were removed as waste.
The magnetic beads were washed 5 times with 300 μL of phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS, pH 7.4, 20 mM). The washes included addition of 300 μL
of PBS to the beads, vortexing the beads in LoBind tubes for 2 min
at 1100 rpm, followed by separation of the beads in a magnetic rack
(tubes were held in the rack for 5 min), and removal of the wash solution.
After the last wash cycle, AFP was eluted from the magnetic beads
with 75 μL of glycine buffer (pH 2); the eluents were transferred
into high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) vials, and the
samples were injected (20 μL) on LC–HRMS for intact protein
analysis.
Instrumental Analysis
Instrumental analysis was performed
using a quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) 6550 mass spectrometer equipped
with a 1290 infinity I HPLC stack (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,
CA). HPLC separation was performed using a 300 Å, 3 μm,
2.1 mm × 50 mm PLRP column (Agilent Technologies). Mobile phase
A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic
acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 300 μL/min, and the
mobile phase gradient was 80 to 40% A over 12 min, followed by column
wash, conditioning, and re-equilibration. The column temperature was
kept at 80 °C.
Data acquisition on the Q-TOF instrument
was performed using high-resolution profile mode (4 GHz); the mass
range was 1000–3200
m
/
z
.
Source conditions and acquisition parameters are listed in Supporting
Information
Table S1
. The mass spectrometry
intact proteim data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium
via the PRIDE
24
partner repository with
the dataset identifier PXD038606.
Intact Mass Data Analysis
Multiple charge envelopes
corresponding to chromatographic peaks at the retention time (RT)
of AFP and human albumin were selected for deconvolution using the
maximum entropy algorithm in BioConfirm software 10.1 (Agilent Technologies).
For AFP, the deconvolution was performed with a target mass range
between 68,000 and 80,000 Da using a 7 Da mass step size. Deconvoluted
masses at the expected AFP retention time were then matched to AFP
full-length sequence without its signal peptide (
P02771
|19-609) and
with 16 disulfide bonds allowing variable oxidation and deamidation.
The variable modifications included known AFP glycan modifications
and a maximum of six sites of phosphorylation.
17
A small fraction of albumin was coenriched from patient
serum samples along with AFP (because of the cross-reactivity of the
antibody); the presence of the albumin peak and agreement of the deconvoluted
mass with the expected mass of albumin were used as an internal control
to assess performance of the assay in every sample. Deconvolution
of the peak at the retention time of albumin was performed using a
mass range of 66,000–67,500 Da with a 7 Da step size.
Based on consensus results reported in the literature,
13
−
15
,
19
,
21
the allowed AFP glycoforms were G0, G0F, G1, G1F, G1S1, G1FS1, G2,
G2F, G2S2, G2S1, G2FS1, and G2FS2 (
Figure S1
).
13
,
14
,
21
These glycoforms
also represent an unbiased and equal number of potential proteoforms
representing AFP-L1 and AFP-L3 isoforms. Match tolerance for the difference
between the observed and the expected intact masses of the deconvoluted
peaks was ±15 Da. For glycoforms G2FS1 and G2FS2, the mass matching
tolerance was narrowed to ±5 Da due to the presence of interferences
from unknown serum proteins observed in the deconvoluted mass spectra
of AFP-negative serum samples (see the
Results
and the
Discussion
sections). Multiple deconvoluted
masses within a ±1 Da window were summed up using their intensities
as the abundance of the matched glycoform. The deconvoluted mass with
the smallest delta relative to the theoretical target mass of each
AFP proteoform was ruled in as the putative match. Based on the results
observed in the analysis of multiple patient samples and their abundances,
the reproducibly observed glycoforms (AFP-L1: G1, G1S1, G2, G2S1,
G2S2 and AFP-L3: G1F, G1FS1, G2F, G2FS1, G2FS2) were used to quantify
the relative AFP-L3%. The formula below was used for calculating the
relative AFP-L3%.
where “I” is the intensity height
of the isoforms.
Immunoassay and GSE to Quantify Total AFP and AFP-L3%
In the study, we analyzed residual deidentified aliquots of patient
serum samples (
n
= 40) submitted for total AFP and
AFP-L3% testing to ARUP Laboratories (Salt Lake City, UT). The AFP
concentration was measured with an Access AFP quantitative chemiluminescent
immunoassay (Beckman Coulter, IN). The AFP-L3% was measured by a GSE
method using the μTASWako AFP-L3 Immunological Test System (Wako
Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan). In this method, LCA first
recognizes and binds to the core fucosylation structure shared by
AFP-L3 glycoforms; LCA and AFP-L3 complex is further separated from
AFP-L1 by gel electrophoresis,
25
and lastly
an AFP-specific antibody with fluorescence label identifies and quantifies
the relative abundance of AFP-L3 isoforms. The electrophoretic separation
and fluorescence detection are both performed on a microfluidic chip.
All studies with human samples were approved by the Institutional
Review Board of the University of Utah (Salt Lake City, UT). Patient
serum specimens were measured by the AFP immunoassay and GSE assay
within one week of sample collection. The residual samples were stored
at −20 °C prior to analysis by LC–HRMS within 6
months of the sample collection.
Method Evaluation
The method performance evaluation
consisted of the following experiments: analytical reproducibility,
analytical specificity, dilution integrity, and comparison with the
lectin-binding GSE assay using authentic patient serum samples. The
analytical reproducibility was evaluated by the extraction and analysis
of three AFP serum sample pools in four replicates; the samples contained
different total AFP concentrations and different AFP-L3%. The specificity
of the method was evaluated by analyzing five individual serum samples
containing total AFP ≤0.01 μg/mL. The dilution integrity
and sensitivity of the method for detecting relative AFP-L3% were
assessed by analysis of a dilution series of serum patient samples
containing highly elevated AFP, diluted with AFP-negative serum samples,
to create four samples containing progressively lower AFP concentrations,
while maintaining constant AFP-L3%.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed
using Excel (Microsoft) with additional modules from Analyse-IT and
JMP12 software (SAS Institute).
Results
Immune-Enrichment Workflow and Intact Protein Analysis of AFP
We have developed a method for the detection of AFP glycoforms
and quantification of the relative AFP-L3% in serum samples. The method
is based on enrichment of endogenous AFP, followed by LC–HRMS
analysis of the intact AFP (
Figure
1
). The assay consisted of the following steps: (i)
enrichment of endogenous AFP using rabbit anti-AFP monoclonal antibody
and magnetic beads with conjugated anti-rabbit IgG, (ii) removal of
nonspecifically bound proteins by washing the magnetic beads, (iii)
elution of AFP from the beads, (iv) LC–HRMS analysis of the
intact AFP, followed by (v) deconvolution of AFP and albumin from
multiple charge envelopes, and (vi) AFP proteoform detection and AFP-L3%
quantification.
Figure 1
Workflow of AFP glycoform profiling using intact mass
LC–HRMS.
AFP is affinity-enriched from serum samples, followed by instrumental
analysis using analytical flow rate LC separation and intact protein
analysis by Q-TOF HRMS.
Following chromatographic separation, intact AFP
was eluted at
a retention time (RT) of 9.9 ± 0.2 min. From the deconvoluted
intact protein mass spectrum, we can see a collection of deconvoluted
masses matched to full-length AFP with different post-translational
modifications (
Figure
2
). The chromatographic peak of human albumin (RT 9.0 ± 0.2 min)
was eluted ∼1 min earlier than the AFP peak (
Figures
2
and
S2
), and the albumin peak was present in all analyzed patient serum
samples. Multiple charge envelopes at the respective retention time
of AFP and albumin were selected and deconvoluted (
Figures
2
and
S2
); the observed intact masses were consistent with the expected masses
of human albumin and AFP containing previously reported PTMs or other
nonspecific modifications.
8
−
10
,
17
,
18
Figure 2
(A) Total ion chromatogram of a patient serum
sample containing
16.7 μg/mL AFP. (B) Multiple charge states detected within the
AFP peak eluted at RT 9.9 min. (C) Deconvoluted intact mass spectrum
and the assigned glycoforms of AFP at N251 based on the intact mass
match.
We assessed the efficiency of AFP immune enrichment
with authentic
serum samples with both high and low AFP-L3% and observed that the
enrichment recovery (absolute recovery of 30%) was independent of
AFP isoform compositions. Based on the protein electrophoresis evaluation
of postenrichment serum samples, AFP was the prominent protein species
(
Figure S3
). The specificity of the intact
AFP enrichment was further confirmed by bottom-up analysis of AFP
in a workflow utilizing the same intact AFP enrichment method, followed
by protein reduction, alkylation, tryptic digestion, and LC-MS/MS
analysis. Nine patient serum samples (mean/median AFP concentrations
of 60.8/18.1 μg/mL) and a commercial AFP standard (Lee Biosolutions)
were prepared and analyzed using the data-dependent acquisition method
on Q-TOF instrument; in these samples, we detected 32 unique peptides
from AFP, representing 69.9% AFP sequence coverage (Supporting Information
Table S2
).
AFP Glycoform Profiles in Authentic Patient Serum Samples
The intact AFP peaks observed in the deconvoluted mass spectra
of authentic patient serum samples were matched to theoretical intact
masses of the full-length AFP sequence with various glycosylation
isoforms (
Figures
2
and
S1
). In the initial proteoform profiling
and assignment process, we allowed all common glycan modifications
available in the BioConfirm
TM
library. We identified several
glycoforms corresponding to AFP-L1 and AFP-L3, which were frequently
observed in authentic serum samples (
Figure
3
). The list of these most prominent glycoforms
(
Figure S4
) was further expanded to include
equal numbers of glycoforms corresponding to the AFP-L1 and the AFP-L3
isoforms. The final glycoform list consisted of 12 glycan modifications:
G0, G0F, G1, G1F, G1S1, G1FS1, G2, G2F, G2S2, G2S1, G2FS1, and G2FS2.
Using the developed method, we analyzed commercial AFP standard purified
from human umbilical cord blood.
26
The
deconvoluted mass spectrum of AFP from the commercial standard showed
distinctively different intact mass spectra (
Figure S5
), suggesting different features of proteoforms in umbilical
cord blood compared to pathologic serum samples from adults (
Figure
3
A,B).
Figure 3
(A) AFP glycoforms identified
in a patient sample with relatively
high AFP-L3%. (B) AFP glycoforms identified in a patient sample with
relatively low AFP-L3%. (C) Distribution of relative abundances of
various AFP proteoforms observed in analyzed authentic patient serum
samples (
n
= 40).
Out of all analyzed patient samples (
n
= 40),
the AFP-L3 isoform G2FS2 (mass 68,799 Da) appeared in 62.5% of the
patient samples (
Table
1
and
Figure S4
). The most frequently observed
AFP-L1 isoform was G2S2 (mass 68,652 Da, observed in 52.5% of all
samples). Both G2FS2 and G2S2 are complex glycan structures with two
terminal sialic acids, which have been reported as glycan modifications
in other studies based on bottom-up proteomics methods for AFP.
19
Another frequently observed AFP-L3 isoform,
G2FS1 (mass 68,508 Da), was identified in 42.5% of patient samples
(
Table
1
and
Figure S4
). The presence of G2FS2 and G2FS1 is
strongly associated with each other in patient samples (
Figures
3
and
S6
). G2S1 glycosylation (mass 68,841 Da) was another frequently observed
AFP-L1 isoform (45% of patient samples;
Table
1
and
Figure S4
).
Table 1
Frequently Observed AFP Proteoforms
and Their Detection Frequencies in 40 Analyzed Patient Samples
intact mass (Da)
occurrence
frequencies (number of patients observed)
glycan modifications
phosphorylation
glycoform classification
68,361 ± 15
4
G2S1
none
L1 isoform
68,508 ± 5
17
G2FS1
none
L3 isoform
68,534 ± 15
6
G1F
6 phosphorylation
L3 isoform
68,799 ± 5
25
G2FS2
none
L3 isoform
68,652 ± 15
21
G2S2
none
L1 isoform
68,841 ± 15
18
G2S1
6 phosphorylation
L1 isoform
68,987 ± 15
9
G2FS1
6 phosphorylation
L3 isoform
AFP Phosphorylation in Authentic Patient Serum Samples
In addition to glycosylation, phosphorylation was an additional PTM
allowed in intact mass analysis and proteoform identification. Six
putative phosphorylation sites in the AFP sequence have been reported;
17
however, there is no published literature to
suggest the occupancy of these phosphorylation sites. Variable phosphorylation
sites combined with five possible glycan modifications can result
in numerous closely spaced theoretical target masses (
Figure S7
), hence creating large numbers of matches
for some of the deconvoluted masses. To minimize these potential matches,
we narrowed the identification criteria to allow two occupancy states:
0 or 6 phosphorylation. In addition to nonphosphorylated forms (glycans
G2S1, G2S2, G1F, G2FS1, and G2FS2), corresponding proteoforms with
six phosphorylation sites (mass 68,841, 69,132, 68,534, 68,987, and
69,278 Da, respectively) were used to quantify AFP-L3%. The identified
proteoforms exhibited variable relative abundance among the analyzed
patient samples (
Figure
3
C).
Method Performance for Determining AFP-L3%
Specificity
Serum samples containing less than 0.01
μg/mL of AFP (determined by an immunoassay) were analyzed using
the developed LC–HRMS method to assess the specificity of the
analysis. The absence of AFP in the serum samples was corroborated
by the absence of the AFP chromatographic peak at the expected RT
(
Figure S8
). To assess method specificity,
background MS intensity within ±0.5 min of the expected RT window
of AFP was deconvoluted and the intact mass spectra were inspected
for the presence of the expected intact masses corresponding to the
monitored AFP proteoforms. Deconvoluted intact masses in the vicinity
of 68,550 and 68,679 Da were observed in few of AFP-negative serum
samples. Based on the above observations, the two possible proteoforms,
phosphorylated AFP-G2 (mass 68,550 Da) and AFP-G1S1 with (mass 68,679
Da), were excluded as proteoform target matches due to potential false
identification. Since both proteoforms belong to the AFP-L1 isoform,
the corresponding AFP-L3 glycoforms (G2F, G1FS1) with phosphorylation
(mass 68,696 and 68,825 Da) were also excluded from the potential
target list for AFP-L3% calculation.
Reproducibility
To evaluate assay reproducibility in
quantifying AFP-L3%, we prepared and analyzed three serum sample pools
at different AFP concentrations (
Table
2
) by mixing patient serum samples containing high concentrations
of AFP with AFP-negative serum samples. Four replicate extractions
and subsequent analysis were performed for each pool, and AFP-L3%
was calculated using the height of deconvoluted masses of the detected
glycoforms (
Table
2
). The variation in AFP-L3% among the replicate analyses was calculated
and expressed as the coefficient of variation (CV%). In two serum
pools with similar total AFP concentrations, but different AFP-L3%
(pools 1 and 2), the imprecision was 1.6 and 17.7% (
Table
2
). In sample pools 1 and 2,
different glycoforms of AFP were detected, potentially impacting the
reproducibility in quantifying AFP-L3% in these samples. The highest
AFP concentration of pool 3 (66.4 μg/mL) exhibited consistent
glycoform intensities across all four replicates (
Table
2
). The technical replicates
(reinjection of the final prepared patient serum samples) showed reproducible
performance for quantifying AFP-L3% (
Table S4
).
Table 2
Reproducibility in Quantifying AFP-L3%
Based on Replicate Analysis of Serum Sample Pools
serum pools
AFP concentration (μg/mL)
average AFP-L3%
CV%
pool 1
16.7
70.8%
1.6%
pool 2
17.0
55.8%
17.7%
pool 3
66.4
55.3%
6.9%
Dilution Integrity
Samples containing high and low
concentrations of AFP were mixed in different proportions to create
four AFP pools with varying total AFP concentrations (115–450
μg/mL), but the same AFP-L3% (
Table
3
). Based on the LC–HRMS intact protein
analysis, the most prominent glycoforms identified in these samples
were G2FS2 and G2FS1 (both AFP-L3 isoforms). The mean measured AFP-L3%
was consistent across the four pools (mean 87.1%, range 81.4–92.2%,
Table
3
).
Table 3
Dilution Integrity of AFP-L3%
serum sample
pools (varying AFP proportions)
AFP concentration (μg/mL)
AFP-L3%
100%
456.5
81.4%
75% pool
342.4
88.6%
50% pool
228.3
92.2%
25% pool
114.1
86.3%
Comparison with the Lectin-Based GSE Method
As part
of the method evaluation, we analyzed 40 individual authentic serum
samples using the LC–HRMS workflow. The total AFP concentrations
in these serum samples (determined by immunoassay) ranged between
6 and 450 μg/mL (mean/median of 87.2/37.2 μg/mL). The
age of the participants ranged from 48 to 91 years (mean/median of
65/64 years). Based on the LC–HRMS method, the relative AFP-L3%
isoforms in these specimens ranged from 0% (only AFP-L1 isoforms identified)
to 100% (only AFP-L3 isoforms identified) (
Figure
4
). The majority of the samples contained
both AFP-L1 and AFP-L3 glycoforms (
Figure S6
). While the AFP-L3% results determined by the LC–HRMS and
GSE methods are comparable (Pearson’s
r
: 0.645,
Figure
4
), the GSE method
quantifies AFP-L3% with a noticeable positive proportional bias (8.6%,
Figure
4
). The greater discrepancies
were observed in patient specimens with predominant AFP-L1 isoforms
and lower total AFP concentrations. It is likely that these AFP-L1
isoforms are not detected as effectively as AFP-L3 isoforms based
on the LC–HRMS method.
Figure 4
Comparison and correlation of AFP-L3% results
based on LC–HRMS
and GSE (Wako) in authentic serum samples. Pearson’s
r
: 0.645.
Discussion
Here, we report a rapid and reproducible
LC–HRMS method
to detect and identify glycoforms of AFP, a clinical biomarker to
monitor impaired liver function. We also selected the AFP proteoforms
of reproducible and specific signals to quantify AFP-L3%, a malignancy
risk differentiator. To measure AFP-L3%, we established an intact
protein analysis workflow to determine the relative abundance of a
subset of AFP glycoforms with and without core fucosylation. While
developing the method, we designed and optimized several aspects of
the workflow, which makes the method feasible to be further developed
into a clinical assay for HCC biomarker, AFP-L3%. Preliminary performance
evaluation suggests that this method is adequately specific and reproducible,
and AFP-L3% determined by the developed LC–HRMS method reasonably
agrees with the relative abundances measured by the GSE method.
25
Optimization of the AFP Enrichment Process for Intact Protein
Analysis
Due to the highly complex composition of human serum,
antibody-based sample preparation was developed to selectively enrich
AFP and to remove the majority of unrelated proteins prior to LC–HRMS
analysis. We evaluated multiple commercially available anti-AFP antibodies
for AFP recovery and unbiased enrichment of different AFP glycoforms
from serum samples. In addition to AFP, the immune enrichment recovered
a small fraction of albumin, which can be seen by intact mass analysis
in all analyzed serum samples after immune enrichment. A likely explanation
for the albumin presence is the partial homology between AFP and albumin,
resulting in a certain degree of cross reactivity with the anti-AFP
antibody and a small fraction (∼0.05%) of the endogenously
present albumin coenriched with AFP. In addition to albumin, there
are other serum proteins present in post-immune-enrichment samples
(
Figure S3 and Table S3
). Nevertheless,
these proteins are of significant different molecular weights relative
to AFP and do not interfere during MS analysis.
Compared to
glycopeptide-based bottom-up methods to profile AFP glycoforms,
14
,
19
advantages of our intact protein workflow include the following:
(i) the immune-enrichment process is performed at physiologic conditions,
which should preserve native AFP proteoforms; (ii) the sample preparation
is faster and less complex without enzyme digestions; and (iii) comparable
ionization efficiency of different AFP proteoforms enables AFP-L3%
determination without the need to quantify the absolute concentrations
of targeted glycoforms. In agreement with glycopeptide-based methods,
14
the most abundant and frequently observed AFP-L1
and AFP-L3 proteoforms contain complex glycan structures with one
or two terminal sialic acids.
14
Although
the GSE-based methods can detect the core fucosylation motif of AFP-L3
glycoforms based on lectin binding, they cannot provide additional
glycan structure information such as terminal sialic acids, identifiable
based on the LC–HRMS method. With further optimization and
automation, the LC–HRMS workflow can be more readily scaled
up to accommodate high-volume clinical testing.
Since there
are several heavily glycosylated serum proteins (IgG,
α1-antitrypsin, α2 macroglobulin, etc.) present in the
postenrichment samples (
Table S3
), released
glycan profiling can include glycans from other proteins rather than
specific to AFP glycosylation.
Optimization of LC–HRMS and Data Analysis Workflow
Chromatographic separation utilizing the 300 Å PLRP column
was optimized to achieve AFP peak separation from other coenriched
proteins such as albumin and to ensure the reproducible detection
of AFP using deconvolution of the multiple charged envelopes within
the AFP RT window. For MS detection, the mass range of 1000–3000
m
/
z
was sufficient to capture multiple
charged envelopes of AFP and albumin and to minimize interferences
from other proteins or small molecules.
The data analysis workflow
was optimized to reduce the computation time and to simplify the glycoform
identification process. We selected a moderate step size of 7 Da to
provide reliable mass resolution in the deconvoluted mass spectra
and high confidence matches to the expected AFP proteoforms with defined
glycan and phosphorylation modifications. Based on the intact mass
differences between AFP and human albumin, we devise two discrete
mass ranges, 68,000–80,000 and 66,000–67,500 Da, respectively,
for deconvolution to obtain adequate quality mass spectra.
While
developing the method, we optimized the mass matching tolerance
using acquired data from enriched AFP-positive patient samples. We
initially utilized a narrow mass matching window of ±5 Da and
found that several deconvoluted masses of significant intensity were
not identified as AFP glycoforms by BioConfirm software, while they
were clearly in the vicinity of the masses of the expected AFP with
various glycan modifications. Evaluation of the larger tolerance window
demonstrated that the mass tolerance of ±15 Da enabled adequate
identification of the targeted AFP glycoforms without introducing
additional false-positive matches.
Altered Glycosylation and Other Post-Translational Modifications
in Cancers
Glycan synthesis and conjugation to proteins is
a dynamic process that is impacted by changes in available sugar precursors,
enzymes, and intracellular signal processes. In neoplasm conditions,
the associated glycosylation changes have been shown to alter core
fucosylation,
8
increase α-2-6-sialylation,
27
and increase N-glycan branching.
28
When using LC–HRMS to profile intact
AFP protein glycoforms, we observed diverse AFP glycoform distributions
in majority of the analyzed patient samples (
Table
1
and
Figures
3
B and
S6
); these glycoforms
were also observed in previous glycomics studies that profile AFP
isoforms.
13
,
15
,
21
In addition
to the core fucosylation, our study also showed that the most abundant
AFP glycoforms detected are heavily sialylated, regardless of the
core fucosylation status in the patient samples (
Figures
2
and
S6
). Because clinical diagnoses associated with the analyzed patient
specimens were not available, we cannot speculate on the association
between the degree of sialylation and hepatic malfunctions related
to different liver pathological conditions. In the previous bottom-up
study, Kim et al reported that approximately half of the glycans identified
in samples of HCC patients were sialylated, suggesting that sialylation
in HCC is common as sialylated carbohydrates play a role in cellular
recognition, cell adhesion, and cell signaling.
23
Although AFP phosphorylation has not been investigated
extensively at a secretory protein level, our study revealed that
a significant proportion of the AFP glycoforms is phosphorylated.
A previous proteomics study has identified six putative phosphorylation
sites on the AFP protein.
17
Phosphorylation
is involved in the regulation of cell functions, including cell growth,
differentiation, and apoptosis with multiple signaling pathways participating
in phosphorylation cascade; alterations in phosphorylation pathways
have been shown to be associated with cancers.
29
Limitations of the Study
One of the limitations of
this method is inadequate sensitivity to reliably detect AFP and its
different proteoforms in patient samples with total AFP concentrations
below 1 μg/mL. When analyzing such low concentration samples,
our method cannot reliably detect the glycoforms of interest; therefore,
additional work is needed to enhance the method’s sensitivity.
Another limitation of the study is the lack of detailed clinical
information related to the analyzed samples; future studies using
patient samples with available clinical information are needed to
assess the diagnostic utility of the various AFP proteoforms with
different degrees of sialylation and phosphorylation.
Conclusions
In summary, we developed a method to analyze
AFP glycoforms that
utilizes AFP-specific immune enrichment, followed by LC–HRMS
intact protein analysis. The method allows to profile different AFP
proteoforms, which are further categorized to AFP-L1 and AFP-L3 based
on their core fucosylation features. The combined relative intensity
of detected glycoforms can be utilized to determine AFP-L3% in analyzed
serum samples. Different from bottom-up workflows, the intact AFP
analysis method reduces the complexity of the sample preparation and
chromatographic separation and allows the determination of AFP-L3%
based on the relative abundances of the identified AFP proteoforms.
As LC–HRMS instruments become more robust, allowing reliable
detection of intact proteins, analysis of intact proteins which have
low proteoform diversity could become more common in clinical laboratories.