Introduction
Determining the cause of death is an important
aspect of forensic
practice. Asphyxia as a cause of death, however, is difficult to diagnose
because the asphyxiation signs on the body can be non-specific or
inapparent sometimes, especially in cases of manual strangulation,
smothering, or positional asphyxia. The determination of asphyxia
1
−
3
as a cause of death is concluded by excluding other causes of death,
according to histological and toxicological assessments and scene
settings. However, the deceased may have underlying heart disease
that can result in unexpected sudden cardiac death (SCD). Then, asphyxia
will be harder to determine because there are also no specific or
representative indicators for SCD. In reality, we often face problems
in distinguishing between asphyxia and SCD, as asphyxia is a common
violent cause of death, occurring and causing high death rates, and
SCD is a global public health issue, resulting in many deaths.
4
−
7
At present, most studies on the determination of asphyxia
use molecular
biological techniques to find differentially expressed mRNAs, miRNAs,
or proteins, such as dual-specificity phosphatase 1 (
DUSP1
)/potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily J member 2 (
KCNJ2
),
8
miRNA-122,
9
miRNA-3185,
10
,
11
surfactant protein A (SP-A),
12
hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α),
13
glucose transporter 1/vascular endothelial growth
factor,
14
aquaporin-5,
15
cytochrome C/apoptosis inducing factor,
16
and migration inhibitory factor-related protein-8/-14 (MRP-8/-14).
17
The same is true for SCD.
18
−
21
However, these biomolecules cannot
be applied in practical work yet because their sensitivity and specificity
necessitate further investigation, as well as the potential effect
of postmortem degradation on their content change and diagnostic ability
is unknown and remains to be studied. Two recent studies by our research
team investigated the potential of mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolomics
to distinguish asphyxia from SCD.
22
,
23
However, the
sample pretreatment and data collection of MS-based metabolomics are
time-consuming and expensive.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy is a rapid, inexpensive,
non-destructive, and relatively simple technique that can be utilized
to analyze biomolecules qualitatively and quantitatively in biological
studies.
24
The spectra detected can be
used to characterize the biochemical status of samples so that subtle
biochemical differences can be explored. This technique is widely
used in the biomedical field.
25
−
28
As an example, cancerous tissues and noncancerous
tissues can be distinguished by FTIR spectroscopy for cancer diagnosis,
which can help doctors diagnose tumors or guide surgical resection
scopes during tumor resection surgery.
29
−
33
Moreover, FTIR spectroscopy is widely used
in forensic science,
34
,
35
especially in forensic pathology.
36
−
40
Studies have focused on the determination of complex
causes of death. Lin et al. and Wu et al. detected pulmonary edema
fluid by FTIR imaging and constructed classification models for determining
SCD,
41
anaphylactic shock,
42
hypothermia,
43
or diabetic ketoacidosis
44
as the cause. Tuo et al.
45
and Wang et al.
46
studied the
vitreous fluid and liver tissue, respectively, of animal models of
fatal hyperthermia and proposed FTIR spectroscopy as an alternative
for determining the cause of death. These reports proved the application
potential of FTIR spectroscopy in determining complex causes of death
and inspired us to distinguish asphyxia from SCD as the cause of death.
However, none of these studies evaluate the effect of decomposition,
preventing FTIR spectroscopy from being applied to determine the cause
of death in practice. In most cases, corpses may exhibit varying degrees
of autolysis and putrefaction because of different postmortem intervals
(PMIs), environmental temperatures, healthy conditions, and so on.
47
Therefore, the effect of decomposition on the
determination of causes of death by FTIR spectroscopy needs to be
studied.
The lung is one of the most important organs in the
respiratory
system and is affected by asphyxia. We hypothesize that the lung biochemical
changes caused by asphyxia are different from those caused by cardiac
arrest and that this difference can be detected by FTIR spectroscopy.
Therefore, in this study, FTIR spectroscopy was used to detect biochemical
differences in fresh and decomposed lung tissues of rats who died
of asphyxia or SCD, and chemometric methods were used to construct
classification models to distinguish asphyxia as the cause of death.
Moreover, spectra of human samples were obtained to validate the results
of animal experiments and test the practical application potential
of FTIR spectroscopy.
Materials and Methods
Animal Experiment and Sample Preparation
Twenty male
Sprague–Dawley rats (weighing 230–270 g) were commercially
provided (randomly chosen) from the Animal Center of Xi’an
Jiaotong University. The experimental animals were kept in a temperature-controlled
(Ta, 25 ± 3 °C) environment with a 12 h light/dark cycle
and were given food and water ad libitum before the modeling. Based
on the cause of death, the rats were randomized into asphyxia and
SCD groups (10 rats per group), as well as calibration and prediction
sets (7 rats as the calibration set and 3 rats as the prediction set
for both the asphyxia and SCD groups). An intraperitoneal injection
of urethane (20%, 1.0–1.2 g/kg) was administered to guarantee
sufficient anesthesia in each rat to make sure that they experienced
minimal pain along with discomfort prior to being sacrificed. This
work was approved by the Laboratory Animal Management Committee of
Xi’an Jiaotong University.
In the asphyxia group, ligature
strangulation was used to construct the model. We placed a noose derived
from cotton thread around the neck of each rat, and we inserted a
small stick into the noose at the back of the neck. After that, tightening
of the noose was done via rotation of the stick to asphyxiate each
rat in the presence of constant pressure until the rat died (between
3.8 and 5.3 min, mean value: 4.4 min, standard deviation: 0.4 min).
In the SCD group, coronary ligation was used to cause acute myocardial
ischemia. Each rat’s thorax and pericardium were cut to reveal
the heart first. Then, the left anterior descending coronary artery
was ligatured, causing the rat to die between 6.7 and 10.2 min (mean
value: 8.5 min, standard deviation: 1.0 min). Hemostatic operations
were performed during the time.
For each rat, part of the lung
tissue was collected after confirming
death and then stored at −80 °C. Then, the wound was sewn
up, and the cadaver was placed inside an incubator (temperature, 25
± 3 °C; humidity, 50% ± 5%) for 24 h (we selected one
time-point to study preliminarily the effect of decomposition). The
rest of the lung tissue, which had decomposed, was then obtained and
stored at −80 °C until use. Before the FTIR imaging measurement,
the fresh and decomposed lung tissues were taken from the freezer,
and 10 μm thick sections of the lung were cut with a cryo-microtome
at −20 °C and were thawed on an infrared transparent calcium
fluoride (CaF
2
) slide and then air-dried for approximately
5 min.
Moreover, human lung tissues from 16 cases (death from
asphyxia,
n
= 6; death from SCD,
n
= 10) were collected
from real forensic pathologic autopsies at the Academy of Forensic
Science, Shanghai Public Security Bureau, and Xi’an Jiaotong
University. The cause of death in the cases was diagnosed by forensic
pathologists through a systematic forensic autopsy examination, including
macroscopic morphological, histological, and toxicological examinations,
taking into account the death process and medical history. The PMI
of these cadavers ranged from approximately 12 h to 3 days, as shown
in
Table S1
. Human lung tissue samples
were made into frozen sections with the aforementioned method.
FTIR Imaging Acquisition
The spectroscopic chemical
imaging data were acquired in transmission mode with the Hyperion
3000 FTIR Spectrometer (Bruker Optics, Ettlingen, Germany), which
is equipped with a liquid nitrogen-cooled mercury–cadmium–telluride
focal plane array detector with 4096 pixels in 64 × 64 grid format.
Using a 15× objective with 0.4 NA, the spatial resolution of
each pixel was 2.6 × 2.6 μm
2
. The spectra were
collected between 3950 and 900 cm
–1
(spectral resolution
of 4 cm
–1
). Before the acquisition of each sample,
the background was scanned 128 times from a clean blank area of the
CaF
2
slides and was averaged. Then, the samples were scanned
64 times, and the averaged absorbance spectra were obtained (the background
signal was automatically subtracted). For each tissue section, six
tissue areas were captured and scanned with 4 × 4 binning (spectra
that were collected corresponding to 4 × 4 pixels were combined
into a single spectrum, therefore there are 256 spectra per area;
each spectrum represented the sample information in the range of 10.4
× 10.4 μm
2
), as shown in
Figure S1
in the Online Resource 1. Consequently, a total
of 240 infrared imaging data (61,440 spectra) were collected from
40 tissue sections of the lung samples (including fresh and decomposed
samples) of 20 rats in the asphyxia and SCD groups. A total of 96
infrared imaging data (24,576 spectra) were collected from 16 tissue
sections of human lung tissue samples from 16 real cases.
Data Preprocessing
By performing data preprocessing,
the robustness and interpretability of subsequent data analysis can
be enhanced.
48
First, a quality test was
employed for every imaging data to remove the spectra with a low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) or spectra with too low or too high absorbance intensity.
The SNR threshold value was set to 200, which was calculated as the
ratio of the maximum signal intensity in the amide I region (1700–1600
cm
–1
) to the standard deviation in 1900–1800
cm
–1
. The maximum absorbance intensity in the protein
amide region (1700–1500 cm
–1
) was checked,
and the threshold value was set at 1.0 and 0.2 (the upper and lower
thresholds, respectively). Second, the qualified spectra were converted
to second-derivative spectra by use of the Savitzki–Golay (SG)
algorithm
49
(11 points of smoothing) to
address the issue of spectral overlap (the original average spectra
are shown in
Figure S2
) and then normalized
by the extended multiplicative signal correction (EMSC) algorithm
to make the data more comparable.
50
Third,
the data outside the wavenumber ranges of 3100–2800 and 1800–900
cm
–1
were deleted to reduce the variable numbers.
These two regions contain the spectral absorption bands of the main
biomolecules of interest, such as lipids, proteins, carbohydrates,
and nucleic acids.
51
Finally, every 20
spectra of the rat dataset were randomly selected and averaged to
form a single spectrum, while it is every 15 spectra in the human
dataset (the averaging operation is to reduce the measurement variance
and the number of spectra to facilitate the subsequent data processing
and analysis; the choice of the average parameter is arbitrary as
long as the number of resulting spectra is suitable).
As a result,
for animal samples, a preprocessed calibration set (containing 499,
419, 416, and 499 averaged spectra corresponding to the asphyxia,
SCD, asphyxia-decomposed, and SCD-decomposed groups, respectively)
and a preprocessed external validation/prediction set (containing
222, 202, 180, and 224 averaged spectra corresponding to the asphyxia,
SCD, asphyxia-decomposed, and SCD-decomposed groups, respectively)
were obtained and subjected to the following data analysis. For human
samples, we obtained a preprocessed dataset containing 623 and 903
averaged spectra corresponding to asphyxia and SCD, respectively.
Data Analysis
As a classical unsupervised pattern recognition
algorithm, principal component analysis (PCA) is usually performed
as the first step to calculate principal components (PCs), which are
the linear combinations of the original variables, to reduce the data
dimensionality. The overall clustering, distinction, and variations
of the dataset can also be visualized by projecting samples onto the
two-dimensional or three-dimensional PC space.
52
In this study, PCA was employed to characterize the spectral
profiles of the asphyxia and SCD groups after data scaling of the
mean center. According to the resultant PC score plot, we can preliminarily
explore if there is a difference between the lung tissues of rats
from the two causes of death. In addition, the outliers (about 10%)
were identified and removed from the dataset according to the leverage
values and
Q
-residuals.
53
Supervised linear partial least-squares discriminant analysis
(PLS-DA)
54
was used to construct classification
models to distinguish the two causes of death. The model was built
by use of the spectra in the training set. A 10-fold cross-validation
(CV) procedure was performed to select the number of latent variables
(LVs) to obtain a better discrimination and prediction performance.
55
To evaluate the prediction performance, the
spectra from the test set were subjected to the model. Moreover, according
to the regression coefficients, the differential spectral variables
that contributed to the distinction between the asphyxia and SCD groups
can be explored.
Subsequently, the relative peak intensities
of these bands were
compared at different PMIs after overall normalization. The statistical
significance of the differences was assessed by the Mann–Whitney
U
test (a nonparametric method) since the data failed to
pass the normality test and the homogeneity test of variance. A
P
value <0.05 was considered significantly different.
In addition, the differences in these bands were also checked in human
samples.
Last, we tried to classify the human sample data as
originating
from the asphyxia or SCD group by use of those differential spectral
variables. The spectral data of 2 asphyxia cases and 3 SCD cases were
randomly selected as the test dataset, and the rest (4 asphyxia cases
and 7 SCD cases) were used as the modeling dataset. Although the number
of real cases is not large, the number of spectra collected from these
human samples is 1,526 (after preprocessing), which is enough to train
a classification model. Linear PLS-DA models and non-linear support
vector machine discriminant analysis (SVM-DA) models were built here
and evaluated by internal CV and external validation/prediction. The
model accuracy was calculated based on the confusion matrix during
the prediction process, whose formula is equal to (TP + TN)/(TP +
TN + FP + FN) (TP: true positive; TN: true negative; FP: false positive;
FN: false negative). The sensitivity is equal to TP/(TP + FN), and
the specificity is equal to TN/(FP + TN). Receiver operating characteristics
(ROC) curve analysis was utilized to calculate the areas under the
curve (AUCs) in the PLS-DA and SVM-DA models. DeLong’s test
was performed to calculate the statistical significance of the improvement
in AUC.
56
Software
Data preprocessing and analysis were performed
using MATLAB R2017b (MathWorks, MA, USA) equipped with the MIA Toolbox
1.0 (Eigenvector Research, WA, USA) and the DeLongUI
57
toolbox (
https://github.com/PamixSun/DeLongUI
). The statistical analysis
was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 20 (IBM corporation,
NY, USA).
Results
Characterization of the Spectral Differences between the Asphyxia
and SCD Groups
The EMSC normalized and averaged second-derivative
spectra for the lung tissues of the asphyxia and SCD groups were compared,
as shown in
Figure
1
. Due to the preprocessing of the second-derivative, the direction
of all peaks is reversed. The larger the absolute value of the peak
is, the higher the relative content of biomolecules it represents.
The peak shapes were similar at first glance, but obvious differences
could be observed in the spectral region of lipids (3100–2800
cm
–1
). There were also some slight differences around
the bands at 1742, 1624, 1466, and 1451 cm
–1
.
Figure 1
Comparison
of the average second derivative spectra of lung tissues
in rats who died from asphyxia (red) or SCD (green). SCD: sudden cardiac
death.
A PCA model was constructed to further reveal the
overall variances
between the two causes of death based on the second-derivative spectra.
The PCA result is displayed in
Figure
2
. In the PCA score plots, each point in multidimensional
space represents a single spectrum that contains rich biochemical
information after dimensional reduction. As shown in
Figure
2
, although there is a slight
overlap, the lung tissue spectra in the asphyxia group are clearly
separated from those in the SCD group in the direction of PC-1, which
accounts for 68.61% of the total variance.
Figure 2
Result of PCA applied
to spectra of lung tissues in rats who died
from asphyxia (red) or SCD (green). PC-1 accounts for 68.61% of the
total variance.
A binary PLS-DA classification model was established
to discriminate
between the spectra of the asphyxia and SCD groups. The Venetian blind
CV procedure was applied to the PLS-DA model to select the number
of LVs. Three LVs were used to construct the PLS-DA model, as shown
in
Figure S3a
. The prediction score and
regression coefficient plots are shown in
Figure
3
. In the score plot, the model threshold,
which decides whether a sample corresponds to the current class, is
shown by the black dotted line. Almost all spectra of the asphyxia
group lie above the cutoff line, entirely splitting from the spectra
of the SCD group.
Figure
3
b shows the regression coefficient of the PLS-DA model. The
wavenumbers with high absolute values of coefficients are important
for classification,
54
so the regression
coefficient plot displays the spectral variables contributing to the
separation. The negatively correlated bands for the SCD group are
mainly found at 1624 cm
–1
, whereas the positively
correlated bands for the asphyxia group are mainly found at 2922,
2852, 1742, 1706, and 1609 cm
–1
. The result is basically
consistent with the result in
Figure
1
. In addition, the external validation/test set was
subjected to the PLS-DA model to assess the robustness and the true
predictive capability spectra. A clear discrimination distribution
is still observed around the threshold line.
Figure 3
Results of the PLS-DA
model built using fresh lung tissues in rats
(collected 0 h postmortem). (a) CV and prediction score results. The
classification threshold is shown by the black dotted line. (b) Regression
coefficients for the PLS-DA model. The “EV” represents
the spectra in the external validation/prediction set. SCD: sudden
cardiac death.
Classification Model and Effect of Decomposition
Another
PLS-DA model was established to explore the discrimination when decomposition
occurred by use of the spectra of the asphyxia-decomposed and SCD-decomposed
groups (two LVs). The plot of the classification error rate versus
the number of LVs is shown in
Figure S3b
. The plots of prediction score and regression coefficient are illustrated
in
Figure
4
. The spectra
of the two groups are completely separated. According to the coefficient
plot, the negatively correlated loadings for the SCD group mainly
show at 1713, 1649, 1624, and 1536 cm
–1
, whereas
the positively correlated loadings for the asphyxia group mainly show
at 2922, 2852, 1742, 1706, and 1609 cm
–1
. Additionally,
the PLS-DA model of the decomposed samples (which is abbreviated as
“the decomposed PLS-DA model” for writing convenience,
and that of the fresh samples is the “fresh PLS-DA model”)
displays a good prediction ability in the external validation.
Figure 4
Results of
the PLS-DA model built using decomposed lung tissues
in rats (collected 24 h postmortem). (a) CV and prediction score results.
The classification threshold is shown by the black dotted line. (b)
Regression coefficients for the PLS-DA model. The “EV”
represents the spectra in the external validation/prediction set.
SCD: sudden cardiac death.
Moreover, some of the spectral variables that contribute
to the
discrimination are consistent with those in the fresh PLS-DA model,
and some are more pronounced. Nine bands were selected and their relative
peak intensities were further compared in fresh and decomposed lung
samples, as shown in
Figure
5
.
Figure 5
Comparison of the relative peak intensities of nine differential
spectral variables in rats between the two causes of death at 0 and
24 h postmortem. ****
P
< 0.0001, **
P
< 0.01, *
P
< 0.05. SCD: sudden cardiac death.
Validation with Human Samples
The relative peak intensities
of the nine bands in the human sample dataset were also compared.
As shown in
Figure
6
a, we found that seven of the nine bands have the same significant
differences as those in the animal dataset, while the band at 1742
cm
–1
shows the opposite quantitative relationship
(the relative intensity of the asphyxia group is greater than that
of the SCD group in the animal data but is smaller in the human data),
and the band at 1649 cm
–1
shows no significant differences
(
P
> 0.05). The human sample spectral dataset
was
randomly divided into the calibration and external validation/prediction
sets. These seven differential bands were used to build classification
models.
Figure 6
Results of validation in human samples. (a) Comparison between
the relative peak intensities of the nine differential spectral variables
of the two causes of death in human lung tissues from 16 real cases.
****
P
< 0.0001. (b) CV and external validation/prediction
results of the SVM-DA model built using 1526 spectra derived from
16 human lung tissues. The gray dotted line represents the threshold
of 50%. The “EV” represents the spectra in the external
validation/prediction set. (c) The confusion matrices of CV in the
SVM-DA model. (d) The confusion matrices of prediction in the SVM-DA
model. SCD: sudden cardiac death.
At first, we established a PLS-DA model, and the
results are shown
in
Figure S4
. The prediction performance
was not satisfactory, with an accuracy of 0.653 and an AUC of 0.732.
The model gave a sensitivity of 0.845 and a low specificity of 0.490
at the optimal threshold. Next, to improve the prediction performance,
a non-linear SVM-DA model was built. In
Figure
6
b, each point represents a single spectrum,
and the probability that it belongs to the asphyxia group is shown
by the SVM-DA model. We found that most of the spectrum was correctly
classified in both the CV and prediction processes. The confusion
matrices of CV and prediction are presented in
Figure
6
c,d. The model accuracy of prediction was
improved to 0.798. The ROC curve and the comparison of AUCs were shown
in
Figure S5
. The AUC of the SVM-DA model
was significantly improved to 0.794 (
P
= 0.00187,
DeLong’s test), which gave a sensitivity of 0.856 and a specificity
of 0.748 at the optimal threshold. Statistics on the classification
of all spectra in each case are shown in
Figure S6
.
Discussion
In this study, the spectral profiles of
the lung tissues of rats
that died from asphyxia and SCD were collected and analyzed to explore
the spectral differences and to build a classification model for the
two complex causes of death. The situation when decomposition occurred
was also considered.
The averaged original spectra of the two
causes of death are very
similar, and the second-derivative spectra with less spectral overlapping
are also very similar. But a clear distinction trend between the spectra
in the two groups was observed by an unsupervised pattern recognition
algorithm, which is PCA. This suggests that the biomolecular differences
in the lung tissues derived from different causes of death may be
subtle, but they do exist and can be detected by the FTIR microspectroscopy
technique combined with chemometrics.
Based on the regression
coefficients of the PLS-DA model, the biomacromolecule
basis of the discrimination can be explored. In the lipid region (3100–2800
cm
–1
), the most pronounced positive absorption bands
at 2922 and 2852 cm
–1
represent the asymmetric and
symmetric stretching vibrations of CH
2
of acyl chains in
lipids, respectively.
58
The sum of the
peak intensities of CH
2
asymmetric and symmetric stretching
vibrations can represent the content of total lipids.
59
In addition, the positive absorption band at 1742 cm
–1
may originate from the C=O stretching vibration
of lipid esters.
60
,
61
These results may suggest more
lipids in the lung cells of rats that died from asphyxia than in those
in the SCD group. IuS and Vi found that a high level of lipids in
pulmonary tissue from newborns could be evidence of intrauterine asphyxia.
62
Their findings are in accordance with our results.
The absorption bands in the region of 1700–1500 cm
–1
are dominated by amide I (C=O stretching) and amide II (N–H,
C–N stretching) of proteins.
63
A
lot of positive and negative absorption bands can be observed in this
region. The intensities of absorption bands around 1650 (amide I)
and 1550 (amide II) can represent the total protein level, but they
are not pronounced in the regression coefficients plot. These results
may suggest that the difference in protein composition or protein
secondary structure, compared to the difference in protein content,
is more obvious in the lung cells between the two causes of death
groups. For example, the negatively correlated absorption band at
1624 cm
–1
is probably assigned to the β-sheet
structure of proteins.
64
It may indicate
fewer β-sheet-rich proteins in the lung tissues of the asphyxia
group than that of the SCD group. The protein aggregation process
may lead to more formation of β-sheet structure,
65
so the absorption band around 1624 cm
–1
can represent the level of aggregated proteins,
66
which could be attributed to tissue ischemia.
67
Therefore, in our results, the difference of
1624 cm
–1
may result from subtle differences between
ischemic and hypoxic processes in different causes of death.
However, it should be emphasized that the nucleic acid bases also
contribute to absorption bands in the 1800–1550 cm
–1
region (due to the C=O, N–H, and C–N stretching
modes),
68
though the degree of contribution
may be low in the fingerprint region. Due to the complexity of the
samples, it is unrealistic to make a definitive assignment in this
study. Therefore, the spectral differences can also be attributed
to the differences in nucleic acid bases. For example, the positively
correlated bands around 1706 and 1609 cm
–1
may represent
the C=O stretching vibrations of thymine and adenine, respectively.
68
,
69
As mentioned in the
Introduction
section,
some differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs have been reported
during asphyxia. Therefore, there might be a difference in mRNA or
miRNA expression between the death processes of asphyxia and SCD,
and it also contributed to the distinction between asphyxia and SCD.
Before exploring the data of decomposed samples, the classification
model built with fresh samples was used to try to distinguish the
spectra of decomposed lung samples, but the results were not satisfactory,
as shown in
Figure S7
. The PCA score plot
of both the fresh and decomposed lung samples is also shown in
Figure S8
. It can be observed that the spectral
differences between the fresh and decomposed samples were larger than
those between asphyxia and SCD. These results indicate that the decomposition
factor may mask the subtle biochemical differences between asphyxia
and SCD, affecting their distinction. A previous report from our research
group found that the causes of death have no significant effect on
predicting PMI using FTIR spectroscopy and chemometrics.
70
In other words, the spectral difference due
to the cause of death is much smaller than the spectral difference
due to PMI. This point is consistent with the results herein. Therefore,
another PLS-DA model was established to explore the discrimination
when decomposition occurred by use of the spectra of the asphyxia-decomposed
and SCD-decomposed groups.
The spectral differences when decomposition
occurred can also be
explored based on the regression coefficients of the decomposed PLS-DA
model. Several same positively or negatively correlated bands can
be observed, although with different regression coefficients, such
as the bands at 2922, 2852, 1742, 1706, 1624, and 1609 cm
–1
. The significant differences in some differential spectral features
are maintained even when decomposition has occurred. But the coefficients
still differ from the coefficients in the fresh PLS-DA model. The
band with the highest coefficient in the fresh PLS-DA model is located
at 1624 cm
–1
(a negatively correlated band), while
the highest band in the decomposed PLS-DA model is located at 1742
cm
–1
(a positively correlated band). This result
may indicate that the biomolecular differences that contribute the
most to the distinction change from the protein secondary structure
to the lipid composition, which might be due to the widespread degradation
of proteins and lipids and the microbial behaviors
71
−
73
(postmortem
decomposition includes degradation/autolysis and bacterial putrefaction
74
). Some bands are more pronounced than those
in the fresh PLS-DA model, such as 1713, 1649, and 1536 cm
–1
. The band around 1713 cm
–1
originates from nucleic
acid bases.
68
,
69
A broad band centered at ∼1650
cm
–1
is related to amide I of proteins,
63
so the band at 1649 cm
–1
is
probably still due to the difference in protein secondary structure.
The band at 1536 cm
–1
is in the overlapping region
of amide II and nucleic acid bases
63
,
68
and might
be attributed to both proteins and nucleic acids. These bands are
more pronounced in the regression coefficient plot, possibly because
the differences in the macromolecules they represent become larger
as the PMI progresses.
Previous research suggests that the height
of an absorption band
is directly related to the relative content of the corresponding functional
groups.
75
Therefore, according to the comparisons
of band intensity, we found that (1) the relative contents of some
biomolecules increase as decomposition progresses (such as the biomolecules
characterized at 2922, 2852, 1649, 1624, 1609, and 1536 cm
–1
), while some decrease (such as the biomolecules characterized at
1742, 1713, 1706 cm
–1
); (2) some biomolecules that
are significantly different in the fresh samples are still significantly
different when decomposition occurs (such as the biomolecules characterized
at the eight bands except 1713 cm
–1
); (3) some biomolecules
that are not significantly different in fresh samples but are significantly
different in the decomposed samples (such as the biomolecule characterized
at 1713 cm
–1
). Certainly, there must be some biomolecules
that are significantly different in fresh samples but are not significantly
different in decomposed samples (but this is outside the scope of
our study). These results may be due to the degradation of biomolecules,
including proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, and the microbial behaviors
mentioned above. Most importantly, there are still significant differences
in some spectral features at 24 h postmortem, and a robust classification
model can still be established to discriminate asphyxia from SCD based
on the differences.
The interpretation of the biomolecular differences
represented
by spectral features is not the focus of this study. The focus is
on how we can screen the differential spectral variables, especially
after death, to build a cause-of-death diagnosis model. The calibration
and prediction performances of the two PLS-DA models are satisfactory.
This indicates that those subtle spectral differences can be utilized
to construct classification models to distinguish the lung tissues
of rats that died from asphyxia or SCD, even when decomposition has
occurred. Although we only investigated the differences and diagnostic
abilities of some spectral features at 24 h postmortem in this research,
the positive results are inspiring and offer a new perspective for
considering the effect of decomposition after death.
And more
importantly, we are glad to find that the patterns obtained
through systematic and standardized animal experiments were basically
validated in human samples in this preliminary study. Seven of the
nine bands, except bands at 1742 and 1649 cm
–1
,
exhibit the same significant differences in both the human and animal
datasets. A linear PLS-DA model was built in the human dataset at
first, but it showed poor performance in both the calibration set
and prediction set. This indicates that the PLS-DA model was underfitting.
It may be that the variation between human data is larger than that
between standardized animals, leading to the fact that the relatively
simple linear classifier cannot deal with the complex human sample
well. Subsequently, a non-linear SVM-DA model was built, and the AUC
value was significantly improved. This model performed well in both
the calibration and prediction sets with a prediction accuracy of
0.798. Although that is still not a particularly high number, most
of the spectra can be classified correctly. Therefore, if we set the
diagnostic criteria as “the class/group that more than 50%
of the spectrum is divided into”, the cause of death is correctly
diagnosed in every case, as shown in
Figure S6
.
This research has two advantages, which are also limitations.
First,
in addition to fresh lung tissues, we assessed the biochemical differences
in the lung tissues of rats 24 h postmortem. However, the PMI range
of corpses may be longer in practice. Therefore, the applicability
of this approach to a longer PMI range needs to be further studied.
Second, we collected human samples to validate the results of animal
experiments, but the study was still limited by the number of human
samples. Age, sex, individual differences, and health conditions might
be potential factors that could lead to baseline differences in biochemical
status.
76
,
77
Thus, more human samples should be collected
so that we may be able to find more trends in the change of some spectral
features or to build a more robust cause-of-death diagnosis model
in the future. The study offers a new perspective and method for exploring
the determination of complex causes of death even when decomposition
has occurred and is therefore very meaningful in forensic practice.
Conclusions
In summary, the spectral differences in
the lung tissues of rats
that died from asphyxia and SCD were related to alterations in lipids,
proteins, and nucleic acids. The subtle biochemical differences can
be used to construct a classification model to distinguish asphyxia
from SCD. The significant differences in some differential spectral
features are maintained after 24 h of decomposition, and we can still
build a PLS-DA model to determine the cause of death. Moreover, seven
of the nine differential spectral features were proven to be significantly
different in the human lung tissues and showed potential for determining
asphyxia in real cases. This study showed that FTIR spectroscopy is
a promising tool for exploring the subtle biochemical differences
resulting from different death processes and determining the cause
of death in practice. It should be emphasized, though, that this is
an exploratory study and only 16 real cases were tested.