Introduction
Protein phosphorylation is a post-translational
modification that
is involved in numerous signaling and regulatory mechanisms. High-throughput
mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics is a powerful tool to study
protein phosphorylation toward understanding these mechanisms.
1
,
2
However, there are several challenges in the phosphoproteomic study.
First, phosphoproteins are generally in low stoichiometry compared
to their unphosphorylated counterparts, necessitating their pre-enrichment
biochemically before being subjected to LC–MS analysis.
3
Second, phosphopeptides are usually not as efficient
as unphosphorylated peptides in ionization during LC–MS analysis,
resulting in reduced sensitivity in their MS detection.
4
Third, the labile character of the phosphoester
bond usually alters the fragmentation pattern of phosphopeptides,
resulting in poor spectrum quality and increased difficulty in spectral
annotation.
5
Finally, phosphopeptides were
often lost during front-end online HPLC separation due to the formation
of phosphopeptide–metal ion complexes, with metal ions on the
surface of the HPLC flow path,
6
−
8
resulting in an unpredictable
chromatographic pattern and reduced experimental reproducibility and
sensitivity. Additional challenges exist when analyzing phosphoproteomes
from plant samples because a variety of metabolites and pigments may
interfere with protein digestion and the enrichment of phosphopeptides.
9
Moreover, phosphoproteins are overall much less
abundant in plants than in animals. It is also an important challenge
to prepare a plant phosphopeptide sample with the amount commensurate
with that usually used for animal samples for LC–MS analyses.
10
Notwithstanding these challenges, recent
technological advances
in nano-flow reversed-phase LC–MS coupled with the increased
efficiency of phosphopeptide enrichment from complex peptide mixtures
improved the number of identified phosphosites to an unprecedented
level in a single-shot phosphoproteomics.
11
−
13
The performance
of LC is critically important for reproducible separation and detection
of phosphopeptides by MS with high sensitivity. Currently, the most
widely used LC–MS system for proteomics and phosphoproteomics
is perhaps the Easy-nLC 1200 (or its predecessor Easy-nLC 1000) coupled
with the Orbitrap series mass spectrometer. Thus, it can be estimated
that the quality of the phosphoproteomics data for many research studies
was largely dependent on the performance of the system.
Results and Discussion
Recently, we tried to develop a working protocol for single-shot
phosphoproteomics of
Arabidopsis
seedlings
using an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. To our
surprise, after numerous tries, we failed to achieve an optimal experimental
condition that allows reproducible identification of phosphosites
from the same amount of starting plant material. The inconsistent
base peak patterns from the resulting chromatograms indicate that
the poor chromatographic performance is probably the major cause (
Figure
1
a). As a control,
an older version of the instruments, that is, Easy-nLC 1000 coupled
with Orbitrap Elite, showed a much better performance in both chromatography
and identification of phosphosites in otherwise same experimental
conditions (
Figure
1
b and
Table S1
). The observation suggests
that Easy-nLC 1200 probably has some defects in the separation of
phosphopeptides. Indeed, after switching the LC of the two instruments,
the performance of the Orbitrap Lumos coupled with Easy-nLC 1000 was
greatly improved in both the number of identified phosphosites and
the reproducibility (
Figure
1
c and
Table S1
), whereas Orbitrap
Elite displayed a much poorer performance compared with that obtained
before switching the LC (
Figure
1
d). This result further confirms the defect of Easy-nLC
1200 in the separation of phosphopeptides. To ensure if such a defect
is a unique case to our instrument or a more general problem, we sent
phophopeptide samples to two other labs and analyzed with an Easy-nLC
1200 coupled with Lumos and an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled with Orbitrap
Eclipse using the similar experimental conditions. Again, a poorer
chromatographic performance, a lower number of identified phosphosites,
and a poorer MS/MS identification rate were observed compared with
the results obtained using Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with Orbitrap Lumos
(
Figure S1
).
Figure 1
Base peak chromatograms
of plant phosphopeptides analyzed with
different LC–MS setups. Phosphopeptides enriched from 300 μg
proteins extracted from
Arabidopsis
seedlings were analyzed by (a) Easy-nLC 1200 coupled with Lumos,
(b) Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with Elite, (c) Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with
Lumos, and (d) Easy-nLC 1200 coupled with Elite. A representative
region in each chromatogram was magnified and is shown in the box
with the red frame.
Phosphopeptides enriched
from plant tissues may contain impurities
such as phenolic compounds, starches, oils, pigments, and secondary
metabolites that could affect the LC performance.
14
Thus, we also compared the performance of the two LC systems
in analyzing phosphopeptides enriched from human 293T cells. Again,
Easy-nLC 1000 showed a much better performance (
Figure
2
a,c,d). Notably, we found that the lower
the starting material, the poorer the performance of Easy-nLC 1200
when compared with that of Easy-nLC 1000 (
Figure S2a,c,d
and
Table S2
).
Figure 2
Performance
comparison of the two LC systems for online separation
of phosphopeptides or total peptides from human 293T cells for MS
analysis. Phosphopeptides enriched from 600 μg of the tryptic
digest of 293T WCLs or tryptic peptides from 2 μg of 293T WCLs
were analyzed using Orbitrap Elite coupled with either Easy-nLC 1200
or Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC at the front-end. (a,b) Triplicate base peak
chromatograms of phosphopeptides (a) or peptides (b) generated with
Easy-nLC 1000 (left panels) or Easy-nLC 1200 (right panels) at the
front-end. (c–f) The bar graphs show the number of phosphosites
(c), phosphopeptides (d), protein groups (e), and peptides (f) identified
with the indicated LC for the front-end separation. Error bar: standard
deviation, ***:
p
< 0.001, **:
p
< 0.01, *:
p
< 0.05.
Since an Easy-nLC 1200-coupled Orbitrap series mass spectrometer
is a widely adopted instrumental setup for proteomics analysis, it
is a surprise that such a defect has not been reported. We reasoned
that the adverse result caused by the defect could be trivial when
the instruments were used for analyzing the total tryptic digests
of protein mixtures. Indeed, when 2 μg of tryptic digests of
293T whole cell lysates (WCLs) was analyzed using Orbitrap Elite that
is coupled with either Easy-nLC 1200 or Easy-nLC 1000, an excellent
chromatographic performance was observed for both LC systems as indicated
by the base peak separation and the reproducibility among the triplicate
experiments (
Figure
2
b). Nevertheless, a slight but statistically significantly better
performance was still observed for Easy-nLC 1000 because more peptides
and proteins can be identified with Easy-nLC 1000 (
p
< 0.05) (
Figure
2
e,f). Similar results were also observed when the starting material
was reduced from 2 μg to 400 ng (
Figure S2b,e,f
and
Table S3
).
Conclusions
Easy-nLC 1200 was designed for operating with a higher pressure,
and thus, several parts in the flow path were made with stainless
steel such as the connectors, which are made from plastic polyether
ether ketone (PEEK) material in Easy-nLC 1000. It was reported that
the metal surface in the flow path of the LC can adsorb acidic peptides,
particularly phosphopeptides bearing a negatively charged group.
15
−
17
The adsorption of phosphopeptides by the metal surface in the flow
path could lead to decreased sensitivity and low reproducibility between
runs. The problem could not be easily detected when large amounts
of the samples are loaded because the metal surface in the flow path
can be saturated by the adsorption of a small fraction of the peptide
samples, and the effect of the adsorption-caused sample loss is not
apparent. For phosphopeptides enriched from plant tissues, a much
lesser amount can be obtained from the same amount of starting material
compared with that from animal tissues or cell lines, and the adsorption
could lead to more significant sample loss and obvious sensitivity
decrease. Simply increasing the starting material of plant tissues
could not alleviate this problem because of the simultaneous increase
of the interfering pigments and secondary metabolites.
14
Therefore, we conclude that Easy-nLC 1200 is
not appropriate for reversed-phase LC–MS (with 0.1% formic
acid in the mobile phase of the LC)-based proteomics analysis for
samples with limited amounts, particularly phosphopeptides from plants.
Methods
Sample
Preparation
HEK 293T cells were cultured in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium high glucose with
Glutamax (Hyclone, 31966-021) and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15140-122).
The cell culture was incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO
2
. Cells at an approximately 90% confluence were washed twice with
PBS and then lysed with 4% SDC lysis buffer. The lysate was boiled
for 10 min at 100 °C. The protein concentration was determined
by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). The proteins were
digested with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin at 37 °C overnight. An aliquot
of the tryptic digest was desalted with C18 StageTip and then freeze-dried
with a SpeedVac and stored at −80 °C before use, and the
rest of the tryptic digest would be used for the enrichment of the
phosphopeptides.
Arabidopsis
(Col-0)
seedlings were ground with liquid nitrogen in a mortar before extraction
with 4% SDS lysis buffer. The proteins were digested, and enrichment
of the phosphopeptides was performed as previously reported.
4
Phosphopeptide Enrichment
Phosphopeptides
were enriched
from the tryptic digest (before desalting) using titanium dioxide
beads (TiO
2
; GL Sciences, 5010-21315) according to the
protocol described by Humphrey
et al
.
18
Plant phosphopeptides were enriched according
to the protocol described by Huang
et al
.
4
Nanoflow LC Tandem MS
The trap column
was prepared
by first creating a Kasil frit at one end of a 10 cm length capillary
with 200 μm inner diameter/360 μm outer diameter. The
frit was created using the method described by Cortes
et al.
using a Kasil formamide frit kit (Next Advance Corporation, NY,
USA).
19
Briefly, the frit was prepared
by rapidly dipping the capillary in a well-mixed 30 μL of Kasil
1624, 10 μL of Kasil 1, and 10 μL of formamide and curing
at 100 °C for 16 h. The 30 cm analytical column (150 μm
inner diameter) for phosphopeptide separation was packed in-house
according to a previous report,
20
and a
10 mg/mL slurry of 1.9 μm AQ-C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Beim Brückle,
GER) in methanol was used to pack both the trap column and analytical
column under 4 MPa nitrogen.
The peptides or phosphopeptides
were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system or Easy-nLC 1200
UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite or Orbitrap Lumos instrument
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, NY, USA). For the phosphoproteomics’
comparison, we used a 110 min gradient at a flow rate of 600 nL/min.
Buffer B of the gradient was composed of 95% (vol/vol) ACN/0.1% (vol/vol)
formic acid and buffer A was composed of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid.
The gradient was ramped from 2 to 21% buffer B in 75 min, to 34% buffer
B in 24 min, to 100% buffer B in 6 min and kept for 5 min. For the
analysis of the peptides from the WCLs, a 90 min gradient was ramped
from 3% B to 8% B in 10 min, to 20% B in 60 min, to 30% B in 8 min,
to 100% B in 2 min and kept for 10 min.
The plant phosphopeptides
were analyzed using an Orbitrap Lumos
instrument. A range of 375-1500 and an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000
(at
m
/
z
200) were used. Precursor
ions with charges of +2 to +7 were isolated with an isolation window
of 1.6 and fragmented by high energy dissociation with 32% collision
energy. The dynamic exclusion with a duration of 30 s was used. For full MS scans, the automatic
gain control (AGC) target and maximum injection time were set at 1
× 10
6
and 50 ms, respectively. For the MS2 scans,
an ion trap was used as a detector, and the ion trap scan rate was
set at rapid. The AGC target and maximum injection time were set at
2 × 10
4
and 50 ms, respectively.
For the Orbitrap
Elite instrument, a range of 300–1800
m
/
z
and an Orbitrap resolution of 240,000
(at
m
/
z
400) were used for the full
MS scan. The mass spectrometers were operated in a data-dependent acquisition
mode to automatically isolate and fragment Top20 multiply charged
precursors according to their intensities. Precursor ions with charges
of +2 to +7 were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation with
35% collision energy. Dynamic exclusion with a duration of 30 s was
used. The AGC target was set at 1000 for the MS2 scans. The raw files
of the MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium
via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD034396
(
http://www
.
proteomexchange.org
).
Data Analysis
The database search was performed in
the MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.3.4).
21
The UniProt human proteome database containing 20,244 entries or
the TAIR
Arabidopsis thaliana
proteome
database containing 35,386 entries was used for the database search.
Variable modifications were set such as oxidation of methionine, protein
N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine,
and tyrosine residues for the phosphopeptide samples. Carbamidomethylation
of cysteine was set as the fixed modification. The maximal number
of missed cleavages was set at 2, and the minimum peptide length was
set at 7 amino acids. The false discovery rates for both peptide and
protein identifications were set at 1%. Other parameters were set
up using the default values.