Introduction
An increasingly relevant approach for
addressing protein–protein
interactions (PPIs) is based on the rapidly evolving technology of
cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry (XL-MS). The general approach
of protein XL-MS is based on covalent bonds that are formed using
cross-linking reagents between proximal functional groups (most commonly
lysine residues) in their native environment.
1
−
4
The actual cross-linking sites
are subsequently identified by mass spectrometry (MS) and reflect
the spatial proximity of regions and domains within a given protein
(intra-link) or between different proteins (inter-link). Additionally,
the cross-linker can react twice within one peptide (loop-link) or
only on one side with the peptide and hydrolyze on the other side
(mono-link), revealing information on the accessibility of a specific
amino acid residue. The field has seen significant technological and
conceptual progress over the last couple of years, and by now, various
enrichment strategies, different cross-linking chemistries, and multiple
detection and annotation strategies have been introduced.
1
,
2
,
4
With the structural probing
of recombinantly expressed static protein
complexes now being firmly established, the recent applications of
XL-MS on the systems level
5
and in living
cells
6
that has spurred great interest
and an ever-increasing number of studies ranging from bacterial, fungal,
and mammalian cell lysates and cultured cells,
7
,
8
specific
cellular organelles,
9
−
11
and tissues
12
,
13
have been reported.
These studies hint at the exciting prospect that XL-MS will soon be
able to facilitate the structural probing of interaction partners
of any protein of interest within living cells or even organisms.
However, the confidence in individual protein–protein interactions
(PPIs) based on cross-linking data depends on the correct assessment
of individual inter-protein cross-links. As recent data show that
erroneous assignments in cross-linking data are frequently underestimated,
14
which is particularly the case for inter-protein
cross-links,
15
this can undermine the confidence
in individual PPIs and protein networks based on cross-linking data.
In this article, we describe a novel mono- and intralink filter
(mi-filter) that is applicable to any kind of cross-linking data and
analysis pipelines. It stipulates that only proteins for which at
least one monolink or intra-protein cross-link has been identified
within a given data set should be considered for an inter-protein
cross-link and therefore participate in a PPI. It is based on the
observation that if the abundance of protein is high enough to be
detectable by XL-MS, the formation rate of monolinks and intra-protein
cross-links will be significantly higher than that of interlinks.
16
In other words, if no mono-link or intra-protein
cross-link can be detected for a given protein, there is a high likelihood
that this protein is not addressable by XL-MS in this particular sample
and any inter-protein cross-link that includes this protein is likely
a false PPI.
We show that this simple and intuitive filter has
a dramatic effect
on all types of cross-linking data ranging from single protein complexes,
over medium-complexity affinity enrichments to proteome-wide settings,
and significantly reduces the number of false-positive identifications
in all these types of XL-MS data.
Experimental Section
Mi-Filter Script
The mi-filter script was written in
python and is available at the Github repository (
https://github.com/stengellab/mi-filter.git
). It is tailored to xQuest
17
output tables
but can, in principle, be applied to cross-linking MS data sets obtained
by any of the established cross-link-identification software platforms
such as MeroX,
18
Xlinkx,
19
Xi,
20
pLink2,
21
,
22
or RNPxl.
23
It selects proteins from
the input data set, which contain at least one mono- or intra-protein
link and subsequently filters for inter-protein cross-links within
this list. It also calculates a decoy ratio (using the ratio of the
target and decoy links) at each ld-Score cutoff for monolinks and
inter-protein and intra-protein cross-links separately.
In detail,
the mi-filter script works as follows: it filters the input files
for a specified ld-Score, then concatenates the input data frames,
and, if specified, filters for biological replicates of cross-linking
sites (therefore, input files must be sorted by biological replicates).
In the next step, it adds a “decoy” column to the concatenated
data frame. In the “XLtype” column, strings are replaced
in a way that only three types of cross-link are left: monolinks and
intra-protein and inter-protein cross-links. Proteins without a monolink
or an intra-protein cross-link are then filtered out by the parameter
“–mi” when running the mi-filter program.
26S Proteasome Cross-Linking Data Set
Purification
of yeast 26S proteasomes was performed as described in a previous
study.
24
S. cerevisiae
cells (YYS40; MATa rpn11::RPN113FLAG-HIS3) were grown for 48 h and
harvested in the stationary phase. The purification of 3XFLAG-tagged
26S proteasome was carried out by affinity purification using M2 anti-FLAG
beads (Sigma A2220). After incubation for 1.5 h at 4 °C, the
proteasome was eluted with FLAG peptide. An overnight sucrose gradient
was carried out for the second purification step. The sucrose gradient
was centrifuged in a Beckman SW41 rotor for 17 h at 4 °C at 28,000
rpm. Proteasome-containing fractions were identified by the degradation
of the peptide suc-LLVY-AMC, SDS-PAGE analysis, and Bradford assay.
Purified 26S proteasome (1 μg/μL) (100 μg) were
subsequently incubated with the isotopically labeled cross-linking
reagent disuccinimidyl suberate d0/d12 (DSS-H12/D12, Creativemolecules
Inc.) at a final concentration of 1 mM for 30 min at 30 °C while
shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). The reaction was
quenched with ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 50
mM for 10 min at 30 °C and 650 rpm. Cross-linked samples were
dried (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus), resuspended in 100 μL
of 8 M Urea, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Promega).
Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by
a solid-phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters). Cross-linked peptides
were enriched by size exclusion chromatography using an ÄKTAmicro
chromatography system (GE Healthcare) equipped with a SuperdexTM Peptide
3.2/30 column (column volume = 2.4 mL). Fractions were collected in
100 μL units and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). For each cross-linked sample, two
fractions (1.2–1.3 mL and 1.3–1.4 mL) were collected
and measured in technical duplicates. Absorption levels at 215 nm
of each fraction were used to normalize peptide amounts prior to LC–MS/MS
analysis.
LC–MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap
Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA).
Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific)
at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over an 80 min gradient (5% acetonitrile
in 0.1% formic acid for 4 min, 5–35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic
acid in 75 min, and 35–80% acetonitrile in 1 min). Full scan
mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000,
a scan range of 400–1500
m/z
, and a maximum
injection time of 50 ms. Most intense precursor ions (intensity ≥5.0
× 10
3
) with charge states 3–8 and monoisotopic
peak determination set to “peptide” were selected for
MS/MS fragmentation by CID at 35% collision energy in a data-dependent
mode. The duration for dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. MS/MS spectra
were analyzed in the iontrap at a rapid scan rate.
For the cross-link
identification of the 26 proteasome in a “proteome-wide
setting,” a database was compiled which contained the 34 proteins
of the 26S proteasome plus the 200 most abundant proteins in
S. cerevisiae
as annotated in the PAX database (
https://pax-db.org/
). MS raw files
were subsequently converted to centroid files and searched using xQuest
in ion-tag mode. Cross-links were exported as .tsv files with the
filter settings Δ
S
= 95 and a max. ppm range
from −5 to 5, containing all (nonunique) identifications. The
mi-filter was applied to different ld-Score cut-offs (20, 25, 28,
and 32) before comparing the ratio of target to decoy hits for each
data set before and after mi-filtering (
Supplementary Data 1
and
Figure
3
A,B).
Pre-60S Ribosome XL-MS Data Set
The data set consists
of biological triplicate measurements of 12 different pre-60S ribosomal
particles, which were enriched using affinity-tagged RBFs and were
collected as part of another study.
25
The
mi-filter was applied to different ld-Score cut-offs (20, 25, 28,
and 32) and target to decoy hits compared before and after mi-filtering
(
Supplementary Data 2
and
Figure
3
C,D).
Proteome-Wide Cross-Linking Data Set
The data set contains
biological triplicate measurements of cell lysate in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and was collected as part
of another study.
16
xQuest results from
this paper were directly downloaded and the cross-linked sample using
equimolar concentrations (1×) of BS3 as a cross-linker was chosen
for further analysis. The mi-filter was applied to different ld-Score
cut-offs (20, 25, 28, and 32) and target to decoy hits compared before
and after mi-filtering (
Supplementary Data 3
and
Figure
3
E,F).
Mapping of Filtered Cross-Links
Cross-link networks
were visualized with xiNET.
26
Data Availability
The MS raw files, the cross-link
databases, and the original xQuest result files have all been deposited
to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository
27
with the project accession number PXD031215.
The previously published ribosome
25
and
lysate
16
data sets have the project accession
numbers PXD021831 and PXD014759, respectively.
Results
Concept of the Mi-Filter
Our “mi-filter”
(monolink/intralink filter) is based on the simple idea that only
proteins for which at least one monolink or intra-protein cross-link
has been identified within a given data set should participate in
an inter-protein cross-link and be part of a legitimate PPI (
Figure
1
).
Figure 1
Concept of the mi-filter.
Only proteins that contain at least one
identified monolink or intra-protein cross-link are considered for
inter-protein cross-links and can therefore be part of a PPI.
Our approach is not designed as a contradiction
to standard FDR
calculations
11
,
14
,
19
,
28
−
30
but is rather intended
as an additional tool that can be applied on the top of the existing
workflows and before the final FDR estimation in order to minimize
false-positive assignments of inter-protein cross-links.
Inter-Protein Cross-Links Are Disproportionally Affected by
False-Positive Assignments
Minimizing false-positive assignments
for inter-protein cross-links is particularly crucial as all PPIs
based on cross-linking data depend entirely on information from inter-protein
cross-links (
Figure
2
).
Figure
2
shows
the amount of detected hits for monolinks and intra-protein and inter-protein
cross-links for the 26S proteasome at increasingly stringent filtering
settings, that is, increasing agreement between measured experimental
and in-silico-generated reference spectra. The decoy ratio is the
relative proportion of detected decoy hits to all detected links.
The data show that the relative proportion of detected decoy hits
for inter-protein cross-links is significantly larger than that for
mono or intra-protein links for all settings and, importantly, that
inter-protein cross-links still contain a significant number of false-positive
identifications at cut-offs where the number of detected decoys for
intra-protein and monlinks are already negligible.
Figure 2
Inter-protein cross-links
are disproportionally affected from false-positive
assignments. Bar chart shows the cumulative amount of detected monolinks
and intra-protein cross-links and inter-protein cross-links (
y
-axis, left) of the 26S proteasome at different ld-score
cut-offs,
31
that is, increasing levels
of agreement between the measured experimental and in-silico-generated
reference spectra. The relative proportion of detected decoy hits
to all detected hits (
y
-axis, right) versus the respective
ld-score setting (
x
-axis) is plotted on the right
y
-axis (symbols).
Mi-Filter Reduces False-Positive Assignments for Inter-Protein
Cross-Links for Different Types of Cross-Linking Data
In
order to evaluate the effect of the mi-filter on false-positive assignments
of inter-protein cross-links, we applied it to typical cross-linking
data sets of different complexities (
Figure
3
).
Figure 3
Comparison of false-positive
assignments for inter-protein cross-links
with and without the mi-filter. Inter-protein cross-links are shown
for three different types of datasets representing typical experimental
set-ups including the 26S proteasome from
S. cerevisiae
as an example of an individual protein complex (A and B), affinity
enrichments of pre-60S ribosomal particles (C and D), and a proteome-wide
cross-linking experiment using
S. cerevisiae
cell lysate (E and F). Panels A, C, and E show the number of decoy
and target hits (nondecoy hits) in nonfiltered (left bar in each group)
and mi-filtered samples (right bar in each group) for increasingly
stringently filtered data. Target hits are shown in blue and decoys
in red. Panels B, D, and F show the ratio of decoy to target hits
of nonfiltered (red line) versus mi-filtered results (blue line) for
the respective data sets.
Our least complex sample is the 26S proteasome
from
S. cerevisiae
consisting of 34
proteins (
Figure
3
A,B).
An intermediate
one is the combined data set of pre-60S ribosomal particles obtained
by affinity enrichment, containing a total of around 300 proteins
(
Figure
3
C,D). We could
previously show that the application of the mi-filter to this data
set results in significantly reduced false-positive assignments,
25
but only now, we have thoroughly investigated
the influence of the mi-filter on this and other data sets and for
various settings of increasingly stringent filtering. The most complex
sample we evaluated using our mi-filter is a proteome-wide XL-MS data
set of
S. cerevisiae
cell lysate
16
(
Figure
3
E,F).
We first had a closer look at the relative abundance
of proteins
that were filtered out by the mi-filter, taking the pre-60S ribosomal
particle data set as an example.
25
Here,
proteins for which a mono- or intra-protein link was detected are
in average of significantly higher abundance than proteins without
mono- or intra-protein links (
Supplementary Figure 1
). This effect has been noted also previously for other data
sets
30
and already indicates that proteins
without mono- or intra-protein links are either not present in the
sample at a concentration high enough for cross-link identification
or they are not present at all.
After the application of the
mi-filter (right bar of each group),
all data sets consistently exhibit a significant decrease in the number
of detected decoy inter-protein links (
Figure
3
A–F). It is interesting to note that
this is not only true for the different sample types but also for
the increasingly stringent filtering settings (i.e., increasingly
good matches between experimental data and in-silico-generated reference
spectra), where the mi-filter is able to filter out most decoy links
already at medium filtering settings (
Figure
3
). We have then used the high-resolution
structure of the
S. cerevisiae
26S
proteasome (PDB
4CR2
) and a cutoff of 35 A° (the maximal lysine Cα–Cα
distance that our cross-linker can bridge) to generate a control data
set with structurally compatible cross-links (bona fide true-positive
links) to assess the sensitivity of the mi-filtered data. Using this
data set, the mi-filter also demonstrates very good sensitivity as
it is able to retain the majority (>90%) of bona fide true-positive
inter-protein cross-links (
Supplementary Table 1
).
Taken together, this demonstrates the value of the
mi-filter as
a stringent filtering device that results in a significant reduction
of false inter-protein cross-link identifications in different types
of cross-linking data.
Structural Accuracy of the mi-Filtered Data
In the
next step, we wanted to test and benchmark the mi-filter also for
its ability to identify true-positive cross-links in a proteome-wide
setting. In contrast to mixtures of purified proteins or protein complexes,
which can be benchmarked against existing atomistic high-resolution
structures in order to assess true-positive identifications, there
is no known ground truth in a proteome-wide cross-linking experiment,
as the precise protein arrangement within a cell or lysate is unknown.
We, therefore, took the totality of MS and MS/MS spectra that we
had experimentally obtained from a sample of cross-linked 26S proteasome
and searched it in a proteome-wide setting (i.e., against a large
protein database; see
Experimental Section
for details) using a constant score cutoff with and without the
application of the mi-filter (
Figure
4
). Our data show that the application of the mi-filter
did not only lead to a significant reduction of detected decoy hits.
When mapped again onto the published high-resolution cryogenic electron
microscopy structure of the
S. cerevisiae
26S proteasome (PDB
4CR2
), over 90% of our mi-filtered interprotein cross-links
fall within 35 A° (
Supplementary Figure 2
), indicating that our mi-filtered cross-links are also structurally
accurate.
Figure 4
Quality of the mi-filtered data. Cross-linking data set of the
26S proteasome represented as a network graph where proteins are shown
as white nodes and inter-protein links as gray lines. Graph is drawn
at the constant score cutoff of Id-25 with and without the application
of the mi-filter and the data were searched against a manually curated
database mimicking proteome-wide protein distribution (see
Experimental Section
and
Supplementary Figure 2
for details).
Discussion
In this manuscript, we describe and benchmark
a mono- and intralink
filter that is in principle applicable to any kind of cross-linking
data and analysis pipelines. This simple and intuitive mi-filter,
which removes inter-protein cross-links if the connected polypeptides
are not additionally represented within their respective intralink
or monolink pools, reduces false-positive identifications for inter-protein
cross-links significantly. We show that this is true for different
types of cross-linking data ranging from individual protein complexes,
over medium-complexity affinity enrichments to proteome-wide settings.
Moreover, in addition to reliably reducing the amount of detected
decoy hits in a given cross-linking sample, the mi-filter is also
able to identify and retain the majority of true-positive cross-links,
suggesting very good sensitivity.
While we have used the
xQuest
cross-linking software
in this manuscript as an example to identify cross-links, our mi-filter
can in principle be applied to any cross-linking software. We therefore
suggest its use as a tool to minimize false-positive assignments for
inter-protein links prior to FDR estimation using the respective workflow
of choice.
Taken together, our mi-filter greatly enhances the
reliability
of individual inter-protein cross-links in any type of cross-linking
data and therefore their ability to provide reliable and biologically
relevant positional information as a source of a PPI.