Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic starkly revealed
that humanity is ill-prepared
for such global catastrophes. Rising population density, increasing
interactions between people and animals in wild habitats, and global
mobility make humanity increasingly prone to emergent large-scale
infections, i.e., future pandemics. It is clear that pandemic readiness
needs to be extended, providing tools that allow early warning of
threatening pathogens. In particular, robust highly sensitive and
specific diagnostics allow screening of large populations for monitoring
of pathogen load, disease progression, and treatment efficacy, perhaps
allowing triage of patients when resources are scarce. Although not
without their problems, current nucleic acid amplification tests such
as reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
have been, and will likely remain, a major tool for large-scale screening.
These types of tests work by detecting amplified levels of pathogen-derived
nucleic acid and are excellent for testing for exposure to the pathogen.
However, there is a need for measuring viral load as a more direct
determination of productive virus infection for monitoring disease
progression and treatment to complement the notoriously sensitive
PCR tests. Indeed, the most recent estimation for life virus and thus
infectivity in patients was below qPCR cycle thresholds Ct 31 on the
E-gene, effectively showing that higher detections are questionable
assets to population testing.
1
Several
groups have suggested that liquid chromatography coupled
to mass spectrometry (LC–MS) might be a method of choice for
unequivocal detection of SARS-CoV-2 proteins (Supplementary
Figure S1A
).
2
−
12
In phase 1 of a community-based effort involving 15 labs and industrial
partners, named Cov-MS, we examined the current state of the art for
direct LC–MS detection of viral proteins in the most commonly
used virus transport media.
2
We noticed
that LC–MS assays for several of the structural SARS-CoV-2
proteins can be developed without having to change sample matrices
or standard procedures. Importantly, the different reports on the
use of MS essentially detected many of the same SARS-CoV-2 biomarker
peptides, irrespective of the model of their LC–MS instruments,
the sample preparation platform, or methods used for bioinformatics
analysis. In other words, preferentially detected peptides in a preliminary
screen turn out to be universally applicable. Thus, a phase 1 assay
can be developed quickly and without the requirement for clinicians
to adopt different sampling procedures.
However, there are inherent
shortcomings in standard LC–MS
methods for peptide identification and quantification. While the latest
generation instruments generate enough peptide multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM) signal for clinical relevance, the limiting factor is the signal-to-noise
ratio.
13
It is predominantly the presence
of a matrix that interferes with and hampers robustness and sensitivity.
In addition to interferences in the matrices, contaminating and potentially
interfering protein molecules are present in most common viral universal
transport media. These contaminate the instrument, limit the amount
of sample that can be analyzed (on-column limitations), suppress ionization
of analyte peptides, require long chromatography times for peptide
separation, and hamper data interpretation.
Here, we build on
previous insights and describe the development
of a second-generation assay, which we named Cov
2
MS, by
implementing SISCAPA immuno-MS peptide quantitation technology to
eliminate interferences and to reduce liquid chromatography time,
allowing higher throughput. As shown earlier on patient samples, SISCAPA
peptide enrichment technology allows very sensitive SARS-CoV-2 protein
detection corresponding to Ct equivalents ranging from 21 to 34 yet
with much higher quantitative precision.
14
,
15
Here, we report on the full impact of this sample preparation step
that enables a more generalized diagnostic method that could readily
be deployed in clinical laboratories. We illustrate that the use of
peptide immuno-enrichment technology for MS-based SARS-CoV-2 detection
essentially addresses the most important issues identified in phase
1 of the Cov-MS assay. The Cov
2
MS assay can now be applied
for the analysis of samples in almost any matrix, i.e., transport
medium or biological background, with limited compromise while increasing
its sensitivity into the attomole range, enabling a strong positive
correlation with RT-qPCR-based viral RNA levels at least up to Ct
30. The entire workflow is amenable to automation using commercially
available liquid handling robots. A single robot can process up to
500 samples in an 8 h shift, and processing 500 samples per day per
instrument is feasible with a cycle time of approximately 2 min as
presented in this manuscript. Importantly, we have demonstrated that
using SISCAPA enrichment, the specimen from one positive patient can
be pooled with samples from at least 30 negative patients without
noticeable loss in sensitivity. An exciting observation was that during
the development of this updated Cov
2
MS assay, two SARS-CoV-2
variants emerged that spread in the population, including the notorious
Delta B.1.617.2 variant-of-concern (VoC). Both variants have mutations
in the peptides used in the assay. The mutated forms of the peptides
were both enriched using the SISCAPA protocol and were identified
by MS, indicating that the Cov
2
MS assay can differentiate
between the Delta and other variants simultaneously.
As a future
perspective, we propose to establish a candidate target
panel of SISCAPA-based LC–MS assays, which will be able to
detect peptides from Influenza A and B viruses at similar or improved
sensitivity as SARS-CoV-2. We propose the use of infection proteomics
as a general term for future extensions of the assay. Indeed, next-generation
tests will have the potential to detect several pathogens simultaneously
in almost all media at sensitivities matching infectivity limits with
considerably higher quantitative accuracies and unequivocal identification
of the analyte detected. Especially in light of pandemic readiness,
we foresee longitudinal population-wide monitoring of up to a dozen
respiratory viruses in pooled patient samples as an early warning
system for impending epidemics and pandemics.
13
Materials and Methods
Recombinant Proteins and Automation
Recombinant nucleoprotein
(N) of SARS-CoV-2 (2019-nCov), Influenza A (A/Wisconsin/588/2019–A/Victoria/2570/2019),
and Influenza B (B/Phuket/3073/2013) was produced in insect cells
with a baculovirus expression system (Sino Biological, Beijing, China).
The SARS-CoV-2 sample preparation protocol was automated using an
Andrew Alliance Pipette+ and Shaker+ connected device (Waters Corporation,
Milford, MA, USA) both operated via the OneLab platform.
Samples
Residual Covid-19 nasopharyngeal patient samples
were obtained from the AZ Delta Hospital, Roeselare, Belgium, with
approval of the University Hospital Ghent ethics committee (BC-09263).
These samples were analyzed at the clinical laboratory of the AZ Delta
Hospital using the Allplex 2019-nCoV RT-PCR assay from Seegene Inc.
16
Lyophilized recombinant N protein was
reconstituted to a concentration of 0.1 μg/μL in 100 mM
NH
4
HCO
3
. A 50 fmol/μL calibration standard
of N was prepared in SARS-CoV-2-negative nasopharyngeal swab pools
of different media, i.e., 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
, Copan
Universal Transport Medium (UTM), Bioer UTM, Sigma Virocult, eSwab,
PBS, plasma, synthetic saliva (saliva substitute, donated by the University
of Leicester), and patient saliva. A serial dilution in SARS-CoV-2-negative
nasopharyngeal swab pools was made: 10000, 2000, 400, 80, 16, 4, 2,
and 0 amol/μL. An equimolar dilution series of recombinant N
protein from Influenza A (Victoria/2570/2019), Influenza B (Phuket/3073/2013),
and SARS-CoV-2 (root (L) strain) was generated in 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
.
Protein Extraction and Digestion
Each sample was prepared
using the same workflow, namely proteins in 180 μL of undiluted
sample (60 μL for plasma) were precipitated by adding seven
volumes of ice-cold acetone (−20 °C). After centrifugation
at 16,000
g
, at 0 ° C, the supernatant was discarded
and 1 μg of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in
150 μL of 100 mM NH
4
HCO
3
was added. Prior
to incubation for 30 min at 37 °C, the samples were transferred
from Protein LoBind tubes into a 96-well sample collection plate (Waters
Corporation). To inhibit further digestion, 50 μL of a 0.22
mg/mL TLCK (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 10 mM HCl solution
was added to each sample followed by mixing the plate on the Shaker+
at 1000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature. Each sample was spiked
with 100 fmol of the Cov-MS QconCAT standard (Polyquant, Bad Abbach,
Germany) before acetone treatment to precipitate proteins.
17
Peptide Selection
Proteotypic SARS-CoV-2 peptides were
selected and validated in the Cov-MS consortium.
2
Complemented with the literature, this allowed us to select
the “best” peptides (
Figure S1A
) as surrogates for the viral proteins. The N protein encoding gene
has exhibited fewer mutations than other SARS-CoV-2 structural proteins
18
and is also the most abundant of the viral structural
proteins.
3
,
19
,
20
Anti-peptide Antibodies and Magnetic Bead Immunoadsorbents
Affinity-purified anti-peptide polyclonal rabbit antibodies specific
for 10 different peptides of N protein were prepared and tested in
SISCAPA peptide enrichment-MS assays. Of these, six polyclonal triggered
the derivation of rabbit anti-peptide monoclonal antibodies (RabMAbs)
from the same rabbits. The RabmAbs were screened by proprietary methods
to allow selection of highly specific, high-affinity anti-peptide
antibodies capable of binding low-abundance peptides from solution
and retaining them through extensive washing steps designed to minimize
non-specific background. The selected antibodies were produced as
recombinant proteins, and all have sub-nanomolar affinities and slow
off rates. Antibodies specific for six peptides (ADETQALPQR, AYNVTQAFGR,
DGIIWVATEGALNTPK, NPANNAAIVLQLPQGTTLPK, GQGVPINTNSSPDDQIGYYR, and
KQQTVTLLPAAD-LDDFSK) were covalently coupled using dimethyl pimelimidate
to protein G magnetic beads (Life Technologies) in 1× PBS with
0.03% CHAPS and stored at 4–8 ° C.
Peptide Enrichment
Antibody-coupled magnetic bead immunoadsorbents
were resuspended fully by vortex mixing. Equal volumes of the six
bead suspensions were mixed, and 60 μL of the mixture was added
to the trypsin-digested samples once tryptic digestion activity had
been neutralized. Plates were put on the Shaker+ and first shaken
at 1400 rpm for 3 min prior to a 1 h incubation at 1100 rpm at room
temperature. After incubation, the plates were placed on a custom-made
magnet array (SISCAPA Assay Technologies) for 1 min and once the beads
had been drawn to the sides of each well, the supernatant (approximately
260 μL) was removed. The beads were then washed by addition
of 150 μL of wash buffer (0.03% CHAPS, 1× PBS) to each
sample followed by resuspending the beads by shaking the plates at
1400 rpm for 1 min. The sample plates were then again placed on the
magnet array, and the supernatant was removed. The washing step was
performed a second time. Subsequently, the beads were resuspended
in 50 μL of elution buffer (1% formic acid, 0.03% CHAPS) and
mixed at 1400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature. Finally, after placing
the plates on the magnetic plate, the eluents containing the eluted
peptides were transferred to a QuanRecovery 96-well plate (Waters
Corporation) for LC–MS analysis.
LC–MS Detection and Quantification
LC separation
was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC I-Class FTN system, with a Binary
Solvent Manager with column selection valves (Waters Corporation).
Ten microliters of the enriched sample was injected onto an ACQUITY
Premier Peptide BEH C18 column (2.1 mm × 30 (or 50) mm, 1.7 μm,
300 Å) column (Waters Corporation). Peptide separation was performed
using a gradient elution of mobile phase A containing LC–MS-grade
deionized water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B containing
LC–MS-grade acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. A Xevo
TQ-XS tandem MS (Waters Corporation, Wilmslow, UK), operating in positive
electrospray ionization, was used for the detection and quantification
of the peptides. Details on the LC gradients and MS parameters can
be retrieved from Supplementary Methods and
Table S1
.
Skyline (version 21.1) was used to process the raw
LC–MS data using a template file containing the six target
peptides. Peak integration boundaries were automatically set on the
heavy standard and manually reviewed before exporting a report containing
the peptide-modified sequence, transition, area, and height among
others.
The mass spectrometry MRM and DIA-MS proteomics data
have been
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Panorama Public
partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD031401.
21
,
22
Results and Discussion
Development and Preliminary Validation of SISCAPA Anti-peptide
Antibodies
Throughout the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, clinical laboratories
have switched between providers of nasopharyngeal swabs and transport
media because of fluctuations in the supply chain. All of these were
validated for RT-qPCR compatibility. However, we have shown that transport
media can heavily impact the detectability of viral proteins using
MS.
2
Therefore, to remove interferences
as much as possible, SISCAPA-compatible high-affinity anti-peptide
antibodies were produced against a selection of proteotypic, surrogate
N protein peptides (
Figure S1A
, red arrowheads).
These peptides were originally also incorporated into the Cov-MS QconCAT
heavy internal standard (PolyQuant, Bad Abbach, Germany), which was
also used here throughout the assay development process.
17
An in-house comparison of the performance
of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies for two of the peptides is
shown in
Figure S1B
. The increased performance
of monoclonal antibodies is especially pronounced at lower concentrations,
effectively increasing the sensitivity of the assay where it is most
needed. The “addition-only” SISCAPA protocol relies
on the use of magnetic bead immunoadsorbents for target peptide purification
and can therefore be automated to both increase the sample throughput
and to reduce technical variation, i.e., increase quantitative accuracy.
Therefore, we optimized a protocol for the digestion and magnetic
bead purification using the programmable Pipette+ system (
Figure
1
A) and later transferred
to the Andrew+ liquid handling robot for determining precision, recovery,
and analytical sensitivity.
Figure 1
Validation of the peptide enrichment protocol
using SISCAPA technology.
(A) Schematic representation of the SISCAPA workflow.
(
B) Comparison of different gradient lengths and their linearity for
detecting the AYN peptide. (C) Linearity of response of the dilution
series in different matrices. The amount that is loaded on the column
(oc) is indicated at the top. This is the amount of peptide following
enrichment (calculation described in
Supplementary Methods
).
After removal of matrix molecules by the peptide
enrichment method,
the LC gradient can be shortened, narrowing the chromatographic peaks
and providing increased detectability without the risk of increasing
interferences. We compared the original Cov-MS gradient of 8 min with
a gradient of 2 min for all peptides and a 1 min gradient for only
two peptides (AYN and KQQ) and assessed the linearity of a dilution
series in PBS matrix (
Figure S2
). Overall,
a 2 min gradient demonstrated the highest linearity, with the ADE
and AYN peptides performing the best in terms of MRM sensitivity,
especially in the low-intensity range close to the lower limit of
quantification.
Figure
1
B shows the response for AYN in log2 transformed intensity (Log2Int).
Notably, using a 2 min gradient, a total of 500 patients per instrument
per day could potentially be analyzed. While such patient sample batch
sizes are not yet available, 600 samples were run in less than 96
h on two separate occasions during the work reported here, including
dilution series comprising a total of nine different matrices. No
decline in instrument performance was apparent. In summary, a 2 min
gradient provided the highest linearity, detectability, and throughput
and was selected for subsequent analyses.
Analytical Performance of the Method
Two peptides (ADE
and AYN) were selected for further work based on their stability and
linearity on a 2 min gradient in all the transport media tested (
Figure S3
). The analytical performance of the
method was further assessed on AYN and ADE synthetic peptide spikes
prepared using the Andrew+ liquid handling robot (Andrew Alliance).
The functional sensitivity, expressed as limit of quantitation, was
3 amol/μL, where the intra- and inter-day %CV and bias were
still <20% (
Figure S4
). Note that the
integration of the raw MS signal is software-dependent and can greatly
impact the limit of detection, which is therefore not explicitly calculated
here but is expressed as a function of the RT-qPCR Ct value later.
Mitigating Matrix Effects
Enabling direct peptide detection
in a variety of transport and biological matrices significantly broadens
the applicability of the method. Therefore, we assessed the linearity
of response for six N protein peptides in a dilution series in (i)
six different (viral transport) media and (ii) two different biological
matrices, saliva and plasma, as well as a synthetic surrogate for
saliva.
Figure S4
shows that the %CV of
three different preparations in these different media increases with
decreasing signal intensity for all transport media, as expected for
MS measurements.
23
To illustrate the transferability
of the method, a similar dilution series in a Bioer UTM was measured
on a SCIEX Triple Quad 7500 System, with very comparable %CV and linearity
(
Figure S3
, inset). Notably, for the combined
sum of intensities extracted from the open-source Skyline freeware
for these two peptides, the blank signal is lower than that at 72
amol on-column in all transport media. Previously, a theoretical detection
limit of 40 amol was proposed by us in samples without matrix, based
on the extrapolation of the signal detection for pure N protein preparations.
2
This in turn demonstrates the efficiency of the
enrichment strategy. In fact, for the UTM, this dilution series implies
at least a 100-fold more sensitive detection compared to the phase
1 Cov-MS, wherein the detection limit estimation was heavily compromised
by interferences.
2
Notably, the biological
matrices and synthetic saliva show a larger variation in measurement.
Still, the signal intensity (area sum of the MRM transitions) in all
media is strongly linear, suggesting that all can be analyzed by the
Cov
2
MS assay (
Figure
1
C).
24
,
25
The detection of viral peptides
in plasma creates the possibility for direct detection of viral load
in blood, in turn enabling the assessment of disease status, clinical
prognostic value, and treatment monitoring. It will be interesting
to test its utility for monitoring long COVID, perhaps using additional
biomarkers for inflammation or immune responses in a multiplexed analysis.
26
Comparison between RT-qPCR and SISCAPA-LC–MS Performed
on Patient Samples
While five monoclonal antibody reagents
were used on a patient cohort of 233 samples, we first assessed the
performance of the AYN peptide as suggested by Hober et al.
14
A 2 min gradient was used, and three different
viral transport media were included, i.e., PBS, Bioer UTM, and Bioer
VIM (Viral Inactivation Medium). Note that in order to define the
sensitivity and specificity for MS analysis, high patient numbers
and a ground truth are required, e.g., by using true negative patients
sampled before the pandemic. Such samples were unavailable to us.
Therefore, a binary comparison to RT-qPCR (positive and negative)
should rather be expressed in percent positive agreement (PPA) and
percent negative agreement (PNA).
14
,
27
Figure
2
A depicts these numbers when
an initial summed MRM intensity of AYN of 26 LogInt is used to define
positive patients for MS, and <Ct 40 is used for the RT-qPCR threshold
(122 RT-qPCR-positive and 111 RT-qPCR-negative patients). As suggested
by Hober et al., we also plotted these numbers against an RT-qPCR
positivity threshold of Ct 30, leaving out the patients between Ct
30 and 40. This clearly illustrates how well RT-qPCR and MS agree,
especially up to Ct 30, with 96.2% PPA and 98.2% NPA, respectively.
14
Figure 2
Comparison between RT-qPCR and SISCAPA-LC–MS performed
on
233 patient samples in three different transport media. (A) A patient
sample batch in different media displays a high percent positive (PPA
= TP/(TP + FN)) and negative agreement (PNA = TN/(TN + FP)) between
RT-qPCR (Ct) and MS (LogInt), especially below Ct 30 (gray numbers).
(B) Secondary axis plots of the raw measurements of E-gene Ct (red
dots) and AYN logarithmically transformed MS intensities (LogInt)
(green bars) for patients sorted from high to low Ct (left) and low
to high LogInt (right). A strong linear correlation illustrates the
level of agreement between both tests. The patient samples were only
prepared once since we only had access to the residual volume (<300
μL) after clinical RT-qPCR analysis. (C) ROC with true positives
defined by either RT-qPCR (left) or MS (right). AUC: area under the
curve. (D) ROC AUCs for each Ct value separately. Up to Ct 26, there
is perfect agreement (AUC = 1). Above Ct 30, a noticeable drop-off
to an AUC of 0.95 can be seen, suggesting that from here on, both
diagnostic tests start to disagree. Error bars indicate the 95% confidence
interval (CI).
However, there are several concerns with this representation.
First,
both tests report a continuous measure rather than a binary outcome
and a threshold needs to be chosen to define “positive”
and “negative”, arguably not trivial for either test.
In fact, the positivity threshold for RT-qPCR varies greatly between
assays and should probably be set to Ct 31 in light of recent insights
on infectivity.
1
Second, the numbers reported
in the matrix are a direct function of the Ct distribution in the
patient population tested.
Figure S5A
illustrates
that shifting, e.g., the positivity threshold of qPCR from Ct 40 to
Ct 35 would not impact PPA or PNA because there are no patient samples
in that region. Third, RT-qPCR is not well suited to define the amount
of RNA in copies/mL, with measurements sometimes differing >1000-fold
between laboratories.
28
MS on the other
hand is considered a quantitative and accurate analytical tool, an
asset typically not attributed to other protein detection technologies,
such as lateral flow antigen tests.
29
In
other words, the Ct reported for a patient can vary greatly and thus
defining RT-qPCR as the ground truth or golden standard does not objectify
the comparison. Finally, there is a potential underlying biological
reason why RNA and protein do not completely correlate, i.e., the
stage of infection.
30
,
31
Indeed, while RNA and protein
levels will most probably rise in parallel at the onset of infection,
it is known that residual RNA can still be detected over a month following
infection when the disease symptoms are no longer apparent.
1
,
31
,
32
Therefore, the raw results
from both tests are first depicted on
two secondary axis plots (
Figure
2
B). Each patient (
x
axis) is represented
by its two respective measurements, i.e., LogInt of the AYN peptide
(green bars, left axis) and the Ct value for the E-gene (red dots,
right axis). As reported earlier, the LogInt of positive patients
strongly correlates linearly (
R
2
= 0.86)
to the Ct value, which is an exponential metric depicting the number
of doublings required for detection.
2
,
14
In both plots,
patients were sorted from low to high virus measurement, i.e., from
high to low Ct and from low to high LogInt
.
While only
two patients with Ct 40 had a LogInt for AYN > 26, evenly spread
patients
have Ct values of 28–35 below this MS intensity threshold,
all the way down to the patient with the lowest value as measured
by MS. These samples are either false positives by RT-qPCR or false
negatives by MS as depicted in
Figure
2
A. Alternatively, this raises the possibility that
these patients were in an early or late stage of infection.
31
Figure
2
C shows
the receiver operating curves (ROC) with RT-qPCR and MS respectively
defining the “ground truth” at the clinical diagnosis
level of Ct >36 or the summed LogInt for the AYN + ADE peptides
at
26.6, which was inferred from the median and median absolute deviation
values of the patient distribution shown in panel B. It is clear from
the ROC area under the curves (AUC) and their confidence intervals
that both tests largely agree. Finally, we plotted all the ROC AUCs
for each qPCR threshold (
Figure
2
D). This shows perfect agreement (AUC = 1) up to Ct
26 and only above Ct 30, a noticeable drop-off to an AUC of 0.95,
suggesting that from here on, both diagnostic tests start to disagree
slightly. Still, it is important to take the patient population distribution
into account when interpreting these thresholds in the higher Ct region.
Next, we calculated multivariate ROC curve analysis based on a
linear support vector machine using all five peptides. Classes were
defined based on RT-qPCR diagnosis together with log summed MRM area
values of the investigated peptide features.
Figure S5B
,C shows the contribution of the different genes (RT-qPCR)
and peptides (MS) to diagnosis as expressed in selected frequency
% (SF%). A
t
-test was used to coordinately assess
the significance of the difference of each of these measurements between
positive and negative patients defined by the other test.
For
MS, a clear distinction was seen in SF% between AYN (SF% =
1.0;
p
= 1.1 × 10
–51
) and
ADE (SF% = 1.0;
p
= 1.3 × 10
–37
) on the one hand and the three other peptides on the other, i.e.,
KQQ (SF% = 0.5;
p
= 1.4 × 10
–30
), DGI (SF% = 0.3;
p
= 8.5 × 10
–28
), and NPA (SF% = 0.25;
p
= 2.8 × 10
–26
). Note that all peptides have a low
t
-test statistic
and thus do differ significantly between positive and negative patients,
yet peptides ADE and AYN again performed best. For the qPCR, the order
of performance was E-gene (SF% = 0.9;
p
= 4.2 ×
10
–31
), RdRp (SF% =0.7;
p
= 1.4
× 10
–31
), and then N gene (SF% =0.35;
p
= 1.0 × 10
–31
) for the best classifying
patients diagnosed by MS. Notably, the E-gene was recently proposed
to correlate best to infectivity.
31
Whether
this correlation also implies that MS correlates well with infectivity
remains to be determined.
Figure S5D
shows the linear correlation
between LogInt AYN and Ct separately for the different media in the
sample batch, illustrating how the transport medium has only minimal
effect after peptide enrichment. Importantly, the initial Cov-MS assay
without matrix removal lost linearity around Ct 20–21 for UTM
samples with considerable MRM signal interference.
2
As Cov
2
MS can now measure positive patients
past Ct 30 in UTM, this implies an improvement of 10 Ct values, or
a 1000-fold (2
10
) increase in assay sensitivity for patient
samples in the UTM matrix. Importantly, this patient data also very
strongly resembles the results obtained by Hober et al., showing effective
inter-laboratory roll-out.
14
Detecting Variants of Concern
When evaluated using
combined peptides ADE + AYN, several patients were significant outliers
from the linear correlation with the Ct value (
Figure S6
). Yet, they behaved more coherently when only the
AYN LogInt signal was plotted. Upon detailed inspection of the most
positive sample (Ct 11), there was no signal for the ADE peptide,
while the heavy standard peptide from the QconCAT was measured as
expected (
Figure S6
, insets). This indicates
that the loss in signal cannot be attributed to sample preparation
issues.
2
Since SAT developed anti-peptide
antibodies against peptide sequences from genetically stable regions,
variant screening is hampered. Still, in a multiplexed assay, the
absence of signal from one specific peptide, while maintaining the
heavy signal as well as the other peptides, could suggest a mutation
in the target sequence. The loss of signal can be attributed to two
complementary phenomena: (i) the MRM assay is not measuring the correct
transitions at the altered retention time, irrespective of (ii) whether
or not the peptide is still captured by the antibody reagent. To assess
the latter, the enriched Ct 11 patient sample highlighted in
Figure S6
was reanalyzed using discovery data-dependent
acquisition (DDA) on a high-resolution TripleTOF 6600+ System (SCIEX,
Concord, ON, Canada). Manual inspection of the data showed that the
targeted peptide was still present in the sample (it was captured
by the antibody), yet the N-terminal alanine (A) in the peptide stretch
was mutated to a threonine (T) (A376T) (
Figure
3
A).
Figure 3
Variant screening. (A) When a patient sample
with a missing signal
for the ADET peptide was acquired in discovery DDA, a fragment spectrum
was found that could be annotated as TDETQALPQR (A376T). (B) The same
sample was then reacquired in MRM, this time targeting the mutated
peptide by precursor mass and by two b-ions that contain the mutation;
a clear signal could be picked up. Adding these to the assay now allows
detection of the mutation in all patients in the batch. (C) By checking
the GISAID database,
33
the frequency of
this mutation in Belgium showed that this variant was circulating
around the time the samples were taken. Not long after, the Delta
variant, which contains the (D377Y) mutation, completely replaced
the other variants. The figure is composed of two consecutive screenshots.
(D) Therefore, a similar approach was applied to specifically identify
a biomarker peptide for the Delta VoC and the resulting high resolution
MSMS spectrum is shown. (E) This D377Y mutation was still immuno-enriched
by the SISCAPA antibody reagent (somewhat less efficiently), and again
the target can easily be added to the MRM, albeit at a slightly shifted
retention time.
Note that not a single peptide other than the SISCAPA
targets could
be identified in these samples using DDA, illustrating the selectivity
of the method and thus the purity of the Cov
2
MS peptide
samples presented for LC–MS analysis. As the peptide was still
immuno-purified, a simple switch of acquisition parameters was sufficient
to detect it beyond any doubt using MRM upon reinjection (
Figure
3
B). To verify the
validity of this mutation, we tracked the GISAID (
https://www.gisaid.org/
) database
and found that this particular variant was briefly circulating in
Belgium around the time of sample collection (
Figure
3
C). Note that if the peptide had not been
enriched by the SISCAPA workflow, the MRM assay would only be capable
of detecting the absence of signal. In turn, however, this inspired
us to verify if we could enrich and detect the neighboring T377Y mutation
known from the Delta B.1.617.2 variant, which arose in Belgium not
long after. Indeed, this peptide too could be identified using high-resolution
MS (
Figure
3
D) and
was detected by a small adaptation in the transitions of the MRM analysis
(
Figure
3
E), as also
seen by others.
34
The mutation had also
induced a small retention time shift.
In conclusion, multiplexing
and use of a stable isotope-labeled
internal standard together allow the detection of the absence of signal
for a single peptide, indicative of a mutation. If the peptide is
still sufficiently enriched by the antibody, then it can be readily
detected by means of MRM analysis using alternative transition and
retention time parameters within the same sample upon the next injection.
This emphasizes the importance of always targeting a minimum of at
least two peptides in order to avoid positive patients evading detection.
Peptide Immune-Affinity Enrichment Enables Efficient Sample
Pooling
Because of the strongly fluctuating positivity rates
of testing throughout a pandemic, it has been proposed to use patient
sample pooling to increase throughput and reduce reagent usage for
RT-qPCR.
35
Up to 1/32 pools can be theoretically
beneficial for RT-qPCR, depending on the positivity rate of the pandemic.
However, for RT-qPCR, this leads to loss in sensitivity since every
dilution step reduces the detection by one Ct value, meaning that
for a 1/32 dilution experiment, five Ct values in sensitivity are
sacrificed and a single positive patient of, e.g., Ct 30 might remain
unnoticed in such pooled samples. In contrast, in this second-generation
Cov
2
MS assay, the tryptic peptide biomarkers are enriched
through antibody binding on magnetic beads. This essentially means
that the peptides are extracted from the buffer, theoretically making
the assay insensitive to dilution and thus pooling.
13
Note that we opted to digest the patient samples first
and pool fractions of these at the peptide level as a positive pool
always requires reanalysis of the separate patients to pinpoint the
positives.
Indeed, for all patients tested, the summed LogInt
of ADE + AYN remained stable irrespective of the dilution, i.e., 1/2,
1/4, 1/8, 1/16, and 1/32 dilution with a mixture of negative patient
samples (
Figure
4
A).
Figure
4
B depicts the raw
signal of a patient with Ct 26. Note that only one-fifth of each patient
sample (10 μL out of 50 μL) was used for every dilution
to create the five different dilutions from a single sample. In a
true world setting, a higher amount of sample, e.g., 40 μL,
equivalent to using a patient with two Ct higher RT-qPCR results,
could be used. For that reason, the raw data from all five dilutions
in
Figure
4
C shows
a lower signal than the undiluted sample, yet the signal does not
decrease with dilution. This effectively proves that peptide immuno-affinity
enrichment is insensitive to pooling, with the starting volume of
maximally 1 mL as a limiting factor based on other existing SISCAPA
assays. Apart from epidemiological population-wide monitoring as an
early warning system, this could also be used to, e.g., screen all
passengers of an airplane in a single analysis prior to departure.
Figure 4
SISCAPA
peptide immuno-affinity enrichment is insensitive to patient
pooling. (A) 10 μL out of 50 μL of the peptide digest
of positive patient samples with different Ct values were diluted
with q-PCR-confirmed negative patient samples in five different ratios
(1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, and 1/32), with each dilution corresponding
to a loss of one Ct value (
n
= 1). However, by using
SISCAPA peptide immuno-affinity enrichment, LC–MS is insensitive
to the dilution effect; hence, a similar signal intensity is achieved
for each dilution. (B) One positive (red) patient with Ct 26 (boxed
in (A)) was manually inspected. The initial measurement of 50 μL
sample resulted in a signal for AYN of 7000. (C) When another 50 μL
of digest from this patient was spilt into five and diluted 1/2, 1/4,
1/8, 1/16, and 1/32 with a digest of mixture of negative patients,
the signal did not decline accordingly, effectively showing how the
SISCAPA workflow is insensitive to pooling.
Multiplexing the Assay to Other Viruses
Because of
the urgency, most of the previous and current work centered around
detecting SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples. However, the approach used
can be expanded to include a wider variety of infectious pathogens
since an LC–MS instrumental setup simply measures two key properties
of an analyte: its hydrophobicity (through its retention time) and
its (fragment) masses (through
m
/
z
or MRM detection). This provides manifold higher multiplexing capabilities
compared to colorimetric detection techniques. Therefore, including
other pathogens into a multiplexed array can be done rapidly and without
compromise, with the gradient time and MS duty cycle being the only
limiting factors. Still, it can be estimated that a 2 min gradient
can potentially harbor enough transitions to monitor up to a dozen
pathogens in a single run. We suggest targeting virus nucleoproteins
as a first approach because they interact with the virus nucleic acid
(providing the linear correlation with RT-qPCR) and are likely to
be structurally highly constrained and thus less likely to accumulate
mutations. In addition, mutated forms of nucleoproteins are not likely
to be selected for because they are less exposed to the immune system
of the host, although antigenic drift on viral nucleoproteins due
to recognition by cytotoxic T cells should be considered for certain
pathogens.
36
Our peptide target selection
(according to the principles described in ref (
2
)) is depicted in
Figure S7
.
Conclusions and Future Perspectives
We have demonstrated
that SISCAPA in combination with LC–MS
can be used for the high-throughput detection of SARS-CoV-2 peptides
in patient samples transported in most commonly used media, as well
as in saliva and plasma, down to a limit of detection comparable to
a viral load of Ct 31 on the E-gene, which is the most recent estimate
for live virus and thus transmissibility.
1
RT-qPCR is perfectly suited for detecting low or high viral load
at incredible sensitivities and throughput. Therefore, if the outcome
is that patients are quarantined upon any viral detection to avoid
further spread of the virus, then an accurate quantitative measurement
of viral load is redundant. Problematically however, based on RT-qPCR
results, patients can remain positive long after the infectivity period
and in these cases, the need for a sensitive antigen test to accurately
determine viral load is paramount.
32
Additionally,
quantitative accuracy will become considerably more important when
detecting viral peptides in plasma for prognostic diagnosis, disease
state, or treatment outcome.