Drug discovery and development
is an extremely costly process, and the number of new drugs reaching
the market per billion dollars spent on research and development is
consistently low. Moreover, the efficacy/toxicity of drugs can vary
significantly in target patients, calling for personalized drug testing.
1
Key bottlenecks of efficient drug development
include the limited predictive value of traditional cell cultures
and animal models for human drug metabolism and personalization of
the model systems.
2
Hence, novel technologies
for predicting personalized drug metabolism are being explored.
Organoids, here broadly defined as
in vitro
three-dimensional
(3D) models that exhibit features of the mature organ in question,
are rapidly emerging as powerful tools for drug discovery and personalized
testing. Organoids can be readily derived from stem cells and carry
the potential for serving as relevant and personalized testing materials.
3
Typically, organoids are 200–500 μm
in size, consisting of organ-specific cell types.
4
For example, liver organoids can consist of hepatocytes,
hepatic stellate cells, endothelial cells, and cholangiocytes and
can be used as a tool for assessing aspects of drug metabolism and
toxicity.
5
,
6
For measuring small molecules such
as drugs and their metabolites,
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a method of choice
in analytical chemistry. Mass spectrometric analysis of organoids
has been performed indirectly (“off-line”), i.e., samples
are collected and handled semi-manually prior to MS.
7
−
11
Off-line handling can be time consuming and prone to variations,
depending on the method, sample size, and analyte stability. Direct
on-line MS analysis of organoids would potentially offer the advantage
of increased automation and possibly improved throughput. Verpoorte
and co-workers have previously combined organs/organ models, chip
microfluidics, and separation science for studying metabolism of liver
slices
12
and pharmacology in a gut-on-chip.
13
We have recently coupled the liver organoids
with sample preparation techniques, such as electromembrane extraction
(EME),
14
which we also found to be compatible
with on-line coupling of organoid-containing chips to LC-MS for studying
organoid drug metabolism.
15
However, EME
requires an electrical current driven transfer of metabolites through
an oil membrane into an MS-compatible solution, which can potentially
limit the spectrum of analytes that can be analyzed.
15
Additionally, a key challenge for coupling chips with MS
ensures practical and robust connections and standardization. Therefore,
we have explored placing the liver organoids directly into standardized/commercial
tubing and connectors of liquid chromatography (LC), perhaps the most
applied fluidics platform in analytical chemistry. Specifically, LC
column housings were loaded with organoids generated from iPSC-derived
hepatocyte-like cells (iHLC organoids) and sandwiched between an upstream
drug delivery system and a downstream connector to a traditional LC-MS
setup. The system, termed “organ-in-a-column,”
16
allowed in-column cultivation of liver organoids
for an extended period, “on-line” exposure to drugs,
and monitoring of drug metabolism using mass spectrometry.
Experimental
Section
Consumables and Basic Hardware
Stainless steel (SS)
unions, reducing unions (1/16″ to 1/32″), SS ferrules
and nuts (all for 1/16″ tubing and for 1/32″ tubing),
SS tubing (1/32″ outer diameter (OD), 0.020″ inner diameter
(ID), and 0.005″ ID), perfluoroalkoxy alkane (PFA) tubing (1/16″
OD, 0.75 mm ID), and 1/16″ SS screens (2 μm pores) were
purchased from VICI Valco (Schenkon, Switzerland). SST Vipers (130
μm × 650 mm) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Waltham, MA). A chromatographic column (1 mm × 5 cm) packed
with Kromasil C4 (3.5 μm silica particles, 100 Å pore size)
was purchased from Teknolab (Ski, Norway). Luer lock syringes (3–10
mL) were purchased from B. Braun Melsungen AG (Hessen, Germany). Acid-washed
glass beads (150–212 μm) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO).
Reagents and Solutions
Formic acid
(FA, ≥98%)
was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Water (LC-MS grade)
and acetonitrile (ACN, LC-MS grade) were purchased from VWR International
(Oslo, Norway). Tough 1500 3D-printer resin was purchased from Formlabs
Inc. (Somerville, MA). For liquid chromatography, mobile phase (MP)
reservoir A contained 0.1% FA in HPLC water (v/v), and MP reservoir
B contained ACN/HPLC water/FA (90/10/0.1%, v/v/v).
Heroin HCl,
6-acetylmorphine HCl, and morphine were obtained from Lipomed AG (Arlesheim,
Switzerland). Heroin-d9, 6-acetylmorphine -d6, and morphine-d3 (used
for heroin stability experiments only) were purchased from Cerilliant
(Austin, TX). Fetal bovine serum-free medium (William’s E medium,
supplemented with 0.1 μM dexamethasone and 1% insulin–transferrin–selenium
mix) and L15 base medium (prepared according to ref (
17
)) are hereafter referred
to as organoid medium.
Organoids and Spheroids
iHLC organoids
originating
from three cell lines (iHLC-1 = WTC-11, iHLC-2 = WTSIi013-A, and iHLC-3
= WTSIi028-A, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute) were differentiated
toward liver organoids using a modification of the protocol by Ang
et al.
18
iPSC line AG27 was differentiated
to form liver organoids containing induced hepatocyte-like cells (iHLCs)
as described by Harrison et al.
11
and was
used in initial experiments (
Figures
4
A,B and
SI1
).
Cryopreserved
primary human hepatocytes (PHH, Gibco, catalogue no. HMCPMS, lot HU8287)
were thawed in hepatocyte thaw media (Gibco, catalogue no. CM7500),
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Uniform PHH spheroids
were created by aggregation in house-made agarose microwells, as described
before,
19
and cultured in Williams E medium
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue no. A1217601) supplemented with
0.5% FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue no. 41400045), 2 mM
l
-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue no. 35050038),
10 μg/mL insulin, 5.5 μg/mL transferrin, 6.7 ng/mL sodium
selenite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue no. 41400045), and 0.1
μM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue no. D4902).
Instruments
and Advanced Hardware
The Dionex UltiMate
3000 UHPLC system and the TSQ Vantage MS with the HESI-II ion source
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. A syringe pump (AL-1000)
was bought from World Precision Instruments (Sarasota, FL). A 2-position
10-port valve (for 1/32″, C82X-6670ED) was purchased from VICI
Valco. A SUB Aqua 5 Plus water bath was purchased from Grant Instruments
(Cambridge, U.K.). A Form 3B 3D printer and wash and cure station
were purchased from Formlabs Inc (Somerville, MA). A PST-BPH-15 column
heater was purchased from MS Wil (Aarle-Rixtel, the Netherlands).
A refrigerated circulating water bath was purchased from Haake (Berlin,
Germany).
Heroin Stability Testing
Stability testing of heroin
was performed by incubating solutions of L15 base medium, serum-free
organoid medium, and type 1 water. The incubation was performed at
4 and 37 °C. For each solution, 100 μL of freshly made
1 mM heroin (in 0.9% NaCl) or 0.9% NaCl (control) and 900 μL
organoid medium were mixed. At 0, 24, 48, and 120 h, 100 μL
of samples were collected from all solutions. To precipitate proteins,
10 μL of 1.1 M FA was added to each sample, followed by vortexing
and 2 min centrifugation at 14,500
g
. Fifty microliters
of the resulting supernatant was transferred to a new vial and diluted
to 1 mL with type 1 water. Samples were stored at −80 °C
prior to analysis. For these experiments, the determination of heroin,
6-acetylmorphine, and morphine was performed using UHPLC-MS as previously
described by Skottvoll et al.
14
3D-Printed
Syringe Cooler
A 3D-printed double-wall
syringe cooler was printed and fitted directly to a syringe cylinder
(
Figure
1
A). 3D-printed
syringe coolers were designed using SOLIDWORKS CAD software (3DS,
Paris, France). Syringe coolers were printed in Tough 1500 resin with
the Form 3B 3D printer. A cross section of the double-walled design
is shown in
Figure
1
B. The wall thickness in the main body was 1 mm. The flow-through
part of the body was 5 mm thick, and the inner diameter was adapted
to fit the individual syringe. Note that the dimensions of e.g. a
3 mL syringe vary greatly between different manufacturers. Cold water
(4 °C) was pumped through the cooler with a refrigerated circulating
water bath (
Figure
1
C). To ensure a cold stable temperature from the start, the water
bath, organoid medium, and heroin solutions were cooled prior to the
start of the experiment. Due to the low flow rate (15 μL/h)
and a small ID of the tubing (0.75 mm), the medium was quickly heated
to physiological temperature upon introduction to the “organ-in-a-column,”
which was kept at 37 °C in the column heater (see also the
Supporting Information
for STL-file.)
Figure 1
(A) 3D-printed
syringe cooler was tailored to fit the syringe cylinder,
ensuring a snug fit. 3–10 mL Luer lock syringes from B. Braun
Omnifix were used. (B) Cross section of the syringe cooler′s
double-walled design. The wall thickness was 1 mm. The water chamber
was 5 mm thick. (C) The syringe cooler was connected to a refrigerated
circulation bath from Haake.
“Organ-in-a-Column”
For fabrication of
the column housing, a 10 cm long piece of PFTE/PFA tubing (1/16″
OD, 0.75 mm ID) was cut and assembled with nuts and SS ferrules. To
one end of the tube, a union with a 1 μm SS screen (VICI Valco)
was connected. Organoid medium containing approximately 50 iHLC organoids
(size range 100–200 μm) was then transferred to a 3 mL
Luer lock syringe. Two spatulas of acid-washed glass beads, containing
approximately 45 mg of beads, were subsequently added. Through gentle
shaking, beads and organoids were mixed in the syringe. The syringe
was then connected to the open end of the column. By pressing the
contents of the syringe through the empty column housing, the organoid
column was finalized. Once the entire contents of the syringe were
passed through the column, the inlet was fitted with a SS screen and
a union. A schematic of an “organ-in-a-column” is shown
in
Figure
2
A. For idle
conditions, a new syringe was filled with fresh organoid medium, connected
to the “organ-in-a-column”, and placed in a syringe
pump. The pump was set to 15.0 μL/h. After filling, the “organ-in-a-column”
was kept in the column heater at 37 °C.
Figure 2
(A) Column housing for
“organ-in-a-column”. (B) Illustration
of “organ-in-a-column” coupled on-line with liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (see the
Experimental Section
for more details).
“Organ-in-a-Column”
Coupled with Liquid Chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry
The pump/syringe system described above was
connected to LC-MS instrumentation. Eluate from the “organ-in-a-column”
was transported to a valve system for fractionation. The valve system
contained two sample loops (5 μL), which were filled sequentially.
As one loop was being filled, the content of the other loop was pumped
to a 5 cm × 1 mm C4 LC column for separation prior to MS detection.
The 5 μL loops were overfilled with an additional 2.5 μL
to ensure that any LC solvent left in the loop was flushed off and
to accommodate possible small fluctuations of syringe pump flow rate
(see
Figure
2
B for
a schematic of the setup). For studying heroin metabolism, a fresh
stock solution of 1 mM heroin HCl in 0.9% NaCl was prepared prior
to each experiment and diluted with organoid medium to 10 μM.
The organoid medium/heroin solutions were delivered constantly at
15.0 μL/h by the syringe pump, with fractionation every 30 min.
This allowed for 5 μL injections onto the LC-MS system, with
an overfilling of a factor 1.5 (=7.5 μL, delivered in 30 min
at a 15 μL/h flow rate) to ensure proper loop filling (see
Tables
1
–
3
for LC-MS conditions (C4 1 mm
ID separation column, flow rate 50 μL/min)).
Table 1
LC Gradient for On-line Studies of
“Organ-in-a-Column” Metabolism of Heroin
time (min)
flow (μL/min)
mobile
phase (%B)
purpose
0–2
50
3
separation
2–10
50
3–20
10–20
50
80
wash
20–30
50
3
re-equilibration
Table 2
Multiple
Reaction Monitoring (MRM)
Parameters Used for the Detection of Heroin and Its Phase 1 Metabolites
analyte
parent ion (
m
/
z
)
product ion (
m
/
z
)
collision
energy (eV)
S-lens value
heroin
370.15
286.04
42
104
210.96
59
104
6-acetylmorphine
328.13
210.96
6
72
180.97
37
72
morphine
286.14
200.99
5
88
184.91
48
88
Table 3
General MS Parameters for Detection
of Heroin, 6-Acetylmorphine, and Morphine
parameter
value
capillary temperature
300.0 °C
vaporizer temperature
200.0 °C
sheath gas
pressure
20.0
ion sweep gas
pressure
0.0
auxillary air
flow
5.0
spray voltage
Pos: 3000.0 V Neg: 0.0 V
collision gas pressure
1.0 mTorr
Proteomic Analysis of iHLCs and PHHs Using Liquid Chromatography-Tandem
Mass Spectrometry
Heroin-treated (harvested after 24 h) iHLC
organoids generated from three cell lines (iHLC-1 = WTC-11 (WiCell),
iHLC-2 = WTSIi013-A, and iHLC-3 = WTSIi028-A, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute) and 3D spheroids generated from cryopreserved primary human
hepatocytes (PHHs, Gibco, lot HU8287) were prepared in two replicates
in addition to controls (untreated iHLCs and PHHs,
n
= 1). Pelleted iHLC organoids and PHH spheroids were prepared by
Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED),
20
using dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAM) for reduction
and alkylation, respectively, and 6 μg of trypsin for digestion
(overnight at 37 °C). Sample clean-up (after concentration and
reconstitution of samples in 100 μL of LC-MS grade water containing
0.25% (v/v) heptafluorobutyric acid) was performed using 100 μL
Bond Elut C18 solid-phase extraction pipet tips (Agilent, Santa Clara),
following the protocol of the manufacturer. The eluate was concentrated
to dryness and dissolved in 4 μL of LC-MS grade water containing
0.1% (v/v) FA.
LC-MS analysis was performed using a timsTOF
Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoElute nanoflow
LC system (Bruker Daltonics). Separation was performed with 25 cm
× 75 μm, 1.6 μm silica particles, C18, Ion Opticks
(Fitzroy, Australia) column operated at 50 °C. Mobile phase A
and B reservoirs contained LC-MS grade water and acetonitrile, respectively,
both containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. A linear gradient from 0–35%
B (54 min) was employed (300 nL/min flow rate). MS acquisition was
performed in data-dependent acquisition parallel accumulation-serial
fragmentation mode, and an injection volume of 2 μL was employed.
Data were searched against the human UniProt database (20,431 entries),
with PEAKS X+ software version 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions), allowing
one missed cleavage and a false discovery rate of 1%.
Measurement
of Enzyme Expression in iHLC Organoids and PHH Spheroids
RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific),
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA concentration
and purity were analyzed using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). cDNA was synthesized using a high-capacity
cDNA reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue
no. 4368814). Gene expression analysis was performed using a TaqMan
Universal mix on a TaqMan ViiA7 real-time PCR system. Petidylpropyl
isomerase A was used as endogenous control. The level of expression
of genes of interest was quantified by ddCt with normalization to
control (vehicle-treated organoids).
Results and Discussion
Liver organoids were generated from four induced pluripotent stem
cell (iPSC) lines and benchmarked to primary human hepatocytes, grown
as spheroids. In support of expected liver functionality, enzymes
related to the metabolism of heroin (CES1 and CES2) were analyzed
and identified by rtPCR and proteomic analysis in iHLC-1–3
liver organoids (see Supporting Information,
SI4-SI5
).
Liver Organoid Charging of an LC-Column Structure
LC
column fittings are specifically designed for leakage-free and simple
packing and come in a variety of diameters and lengths, with readily
available fittings. Hence, we aimed to investigate whether LC columns
could be directly loaded with liver organoids and whether the liver
organoids can be grown for an extended period in the columns without
losing viability. LC columns have previously been demonstrated as
useful housings for studying biological interactions, e.g., Wiedmer
and co-workers′ studies of drug interactions with in-column
liposomes.
21
Liver organoids were used
for packing LC column housings: iHLC organoids from four different
iPSC cell lines.
For liquid chromatography column housings,
a micro LC format was chosen (0.75 mm ID and 10 cm length). Both PFA
tubing and PTFE tubing have been used instead of regular steel column
housings as their optical properties allow for visual inspection of
organoids in situ (see
Figure
3
of stained organoids in the column). To prevent clogging,
organoid medium containing liver organoids was supplemented with glass
beads (45 mg beads per 10 cm column/50 organoids) prior to packing.
After gently mixing the organoid/glass bead containing the organoid
medium solution, columns were filled manually with a syringe into
an open LC column housing. Postfilling, the column was coupled to
the upstream and downstream hardware. The addition of the beads kept
the liver organoids well-spaced throughout the column, significantly
reducing clogging and increasing the robustness of the system.
Figure 3
Fluorescence
microscopy image of iHLC organoids loaded with glass
beads in an “organ-in-a-column”. Viable cells were stained
with green fluorescent calcein-AM. Dead cells were stained with propidium
iodide (red). Brightfield (B), green (C), and red (D) channels are
shown below the merge (A). Scale bar is 600 μm.
After on-line culture and measurements (see below), liver
organoids
could be readily flushed from the column by removing one of the columns’
unions and applying mild pressure with a handheld syringe. Preloading
and postflushing inspection of the organoids by microscopy revealed
that >80% of the organoids showed substantial amounts of live staining
after 7 days within the perfused column in both the absence and presence
of heroin exposure (see Supporting Information,
SI1
for examples).
Coupling of the Liver Organoid-Loaded “Organ-in-a-Column”
to an LC-MS System
The “organ-in-a-column”
containing iHLCs was coupled to high-pressure LC through a fractionation
valve setup. LC-MS is generally operated at high pressures e.g., 50–400
bars, which is incompatible with organoid culture. A 2-position 10-port
stainless steel valve was used to collect and pump liquid fractions
to the LC-MS system, not unlike that used for two-dimensional LC separations.
22
The valve system setup efficiently isolated
the organoids from nonbiocompatible solvents and high pressure of
the analysis system (see
Figure
2
B).
Organoid medium is complex and can contain
considerable amounts of proteins such as albumin. Sample complexity
and the presence of proteins can cause unpredictable chromatographic
performance. A short-chained butyl (C4) stationary phase was thought
to be necessary regarding robustness for 100s of injections of protein-rich
organoid medium. The column (considered relatively compatible with
proteins) allowed for repeatable chromatography of organoid medium
spiked with model substance heroin/metabolites at this stage of the
project (see
Figure
4
A). Mass spectrometric detection was performed
in multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode, which allowed highly selective
and sensitive detection of small molecules, such as heroin and its
metabolites 6-acetylmorphine and morphine (
Figure
4
B, from initial experiments with AG27-derived
organoids). The mobile phase composition was also a key parameter
regarding robustness; methanol as an organic modifier was associated
with column clogging and poor performance when chromatographing the
organoid medium, while acetonitrile provided significantly improved
performance (see
Figure
4
C for illustration of the retention time repeatability (RSD between
2 and 5%) for the system).
Figure 4
(A) LC-MS chromatogram of heroin and metabolites
derived from an
“organ-in-a-column” system exposed to heroin coupled
on-line with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The gradient
program as a function of organic mobile phase modifier (%B) is shown
in red. The four stages of the gradient program are (I) isocratic
elution, (II) gradient elution, (III) wash, and (IV) re-equilibration.
(B) Extracted ion chromatograms for heroin and metabolites are shown
with MRM transitions that were used. The chromatograms were extracted
from the same run that is shown in (A). (C) Retention time variability
of heroin and metabolites over an entire exposure experiment (24 injections/12
h).
Temperature Controlled
Drug Delivery Ensures Improved Robustness
Heroin can spontaneously
decompose into its metabolite 6-acetylmorphine.
However, we found that heroin could also be converted to morphine
nonenzymatically. At 37 °C, approximately 5% conversion of heroin
to morphine was observed after 24 h and 20% over 120 h (see Supporting
Information
SI2
). Hence, at physiological
temperatures required for metabolic functional cells, heroin can decompose
to 6-acetylmorphine and morphine in the absence of liver organoids.
However, when cooled to 4 °C, less than 1% morphine was formed
in the absence of liver organoids (see Supporting Information
SI2
). To avoid the formation of morphine prior
to organoid exposure, a 3D-printed syringe cooler was designed and
implemented in the system (
Figure
1
).
“Organ-in-a-Column”-LC-MS Drug
Metabolism Studies
on iHLC
Our next step was to evaluate the system′s
functionality for tracking drugs and metabolites over time with cooled
organoid medium supplemented with 10 μM heroin and iHLC organoids
coloaded with glass beads.
Figure
5
shows the degradation of heroin and the corresponding
generation of metabolites 6-acetylmorphine and morphine for individual
“organ-in-a-column” units, as documented by three experiments
performed with iHLC organoids generated from the WTC-11 cell line,
on different days and columns.
Figure 5
On-line enzymatic and nonenzymatic conversion
of heroin (10 μM)
to 6-acetylmorphine and morphine in columns containing approximately
50 iHLC organoids (sample) and columns containing no organoids (control).
Graphs show average areas of heroin and metabolites normalized to
the average total area of heroin, 6-acetylmorphine, and morphine (area-%
of avg. total area of heroin, 6-acetylmorphine, and morphine). The
average total areas of heroin, 6-acetylmorphine, and morphine are
based on three runs performed on different days (12 h experiments)
and columns with organoids from the WTC-11 cell line (error bars:
standard deviation,
n
= 3).
Controls (i.e., columns loaded with beads but not loaded with organoids)
generated nondetectable amounts of morphine during the 12 h experiment,
establishing that the precolumn cooling system efficiently prevented
nonenzymatic degradation. As expected, a gradual conversion of heroin
to 6-acetylmorphine was detected in columns without organoids. In
contrast, in organoid-loaded columns, heroin levels decreased more
rapidly, while morphine levels increased over time. The data presented
in
Figure
5
were generated
over 12 h of continuous and fully automated/unsupervised analysis,
suggesting that on-line coupling of organoids and MS via commercial
LC hardware is feasible.
The patterns observed for heroin metabolism
were similar to that
obtained with standard, off-line methods for studying liver organoids,
11
i.e., a drop in heroin levels in parallel with
morphine levels increasing and plateauing on an hour-scale basis,
compared to substantially more rapid metabolism rates when employing
microsomes and S9 fractions.
14
Next,
heroin metabolism was compared in columns using iHLC organoids
independently differentiated from three iPSCs. As expected, the biological
variation in these experiments resulted in larger standard deviation
but still identified significant levels of morphine when compared
to the control (
n
= 3) (see Supporting Information
SI3
).
Concluding Remarks
In this proof-of-concept study, liver organoids have been loaded
in liquid chromatography column housings (“organ-in-a-column”)
and coupled on-line with mass spectrometry for direct analysis of
drug metabolism. Features of the here described setting include a
substantial degree of automation compared to our previous manual efforts,
11
selective measurements through multiple reaction
monitoring, and an increased degree of robustness through the use
of standard LC parts and fittings, compared to noncommercial chips
previously employed.
15
The setup could
be used for directly identifying liver organoid-induced drug metabolism
and subsequent hour-scale monitoring of metabolism. Future qualitative
identifications of metabolites will include further standardization
of column packing and inclusion of internal standards to reduce ESI-MS
signal variations.
The system will be further explored for additional
drugs and configurations.
Improvements will include an autosampler for multidrug analysis, a
valve for diversion of salts, and on-line sample clean-up setups.
This encourages the next steps to include expanded drug metabolism
studies for mapping enzyme activity (e.g., drugs such as phenacetin,
tolbutamide, and fluoxetine, metabolized by CYP2D6, CYP2C9, and CYP1A2,
respectively), which can have clear benefits in e.g., personalized
drug development when assessing organoids grown from individual patients/patient
groups.