Introduction
Mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics
has seen a rapid
evolution in various fields of science and is now widely used as a
high-throughput approach for the quantitative characterization of
proteomes in biology and clinical research.
1
−
3
Both instruments
and raw data interpretation software have seen systematic improvements
over the years.
4
−
8
Common approaches to label-free proteomics are Data Dependent Analysis
(DDA) and Data Independent Analysis (DIA). The former aims to both
identify and quantify peptides whereas the latter aims to optimize
sensitivity and reproducibility for quantitative studies through customized
data acquisition strategies and posthoc data mining.
9
,
10
Recent innovations have greatly improved identification of peptides
directly from DIA data
7
,
11
and using hybrid spectral libraries
from both DDA and DIA data.
12
Output data
from the mass spectrometer (“raw data”) is first processed
into a set of peptides and proteins, each with a confidence score
and quantitative value per analyzed sample. FragPipe,
13
MaxQuant,
14
Skyline,
15
ProteomeDiscoverer, MetaMorpheus,
16
Spectronaut
17
and
DIA-NN
7
are some of the commonly used tools.
The next step is downstream analysis, which typically consists of
three steps; removing low quality peptides and/or proteins (e.g.,
low confidence score, or identified sporadically), data normalization
and statistical analyses to identify differentially expressed proteins.
Normalization algorithms aim to reduce variation in abundance levels
between (biological) replicates, for instance, caused by sample loading
differences, while maintaining differences in expression between conditions.
Accurately scaling abundance values between groups is especially challenging
in data sets with asymmetric protein foldchanges. In proteomics and
gene expression studies alike, there is a mean-variance relationship
and some normalization approaches take this into account, such as
Variance Stabilizing Normalization (VSN),
18
while other approaches scale all abundance values per sample by
a constant factor such as the foldchange-based normalization algorithm
included in the MS-EmpiRe R package.
19
Normalization
has a major impact on the outcome of statistical analyses for both
proteomics
20
and RNA-seq data,
21
so it is imperative that researchers select
an algorithm (from the many available) that is appropriate for the
data set at hand. To this end, comparative data analyses of such algorithms
using representative benchmarking data sets can reveal which algorithms
generally outperform and are a good starting point when analyzing
real-world data sets.
Recent innovations in statistical models
for label-free proteomics
data empower quantitative proteomics with increased sensitivity. The
DEqMS
22
model extends the common strategy
of moderated t-statistics applied to protein abundances, popular implementations
include limma eBayes
23
and Perseus,
24
by incorporating the number of quantified peptides
per protein into the DEqMS model. Statistical models such as MSqRob
25
and MS-EmpiRe
19
operate
directly on peptide abundance values to estimate differential expression
likelihood at the protein-level and do not require peptide to protein
rollup. By estimating the confidence level of peptides these models
can find the consensus effect-size of each protein with more tolerance
to outlier data points, as compared to models that require a priori
protein rollup (e.g., using the MaxLFQ algorithm
26
). MsqRobSum
27
is a hybrid approach
that uses the MSqRob peptide-level regression model to summarize peptide-level
data to the protein-level, after which statistics can be applied to
protein abundance values.
There are many tools that facilitate
these downstream analysis
steps, some are provided as graphical user interfaces, e.g., Perseus,
24
ProtExA
28
and LFQ-Analyst,
29
or as R packages such as MSstats,
30
DEP,
31
NormalyzerDE
32
and protti.
33
However,
many of these existing pipelines implement few algorithms for normalization
and statistical analyses without the ability for the user community
to apply additional algorithms (e.g., methods not supported when the
pipeline was built/published, or novel methods published in years
after). Moreover, some are specific to work only with input data generated
by 1 raw data processing software such as MaxQuant. For instance,
most pipelines described previously support differential expression
analysis (DEA) using moderated t-statistics (e.g., limma eBayes or
analogous implementations) but do not support algorithms that improve
on this, such as MSqRob,
25
MS-EmpiRe
19
or DEqMS.
22
The recently
published StatsPro
34
implements multiple
protein-level DEA algorithms, including aforementioned MSqRobSum,
limma eBayes and DEqMS, but not MS-EmpiRe and MSqRob. Building in-house
scripts to accommodate a combination of normalization and statistical
model of choice is laborious and requires in-depth bioinformatics
expertise to ensure construction of high-quality data workflows. This
hampers the adoption of state-of-the-art algorithms by the wider proteomics
community.
Therefore, we generated a downstream analysis pipeline
for label-free
proteomics data sets, named Mass Spectrometry Downstream Analysis
Pipeline (MS-DAP), that encompasses different stages of quantitative
data interpretation. Current state-of-the-art algorithms for normalization
and differential testing are integrated, and future algorithmic innovations
can be easily plugged in. The pipeline produces standardized PDF reports
with extensive data visualizations, quality reporting that is automatically
generated from user-provided experiment metadata (e.g., sample measurement
order, experiment batches, cohorts, etc.) and includes documentation
for each analysis.
We used MS-DAP to perform systematic evaluation
of all embedded
algorithms using a wide variety of benchmark data sets (DDA, DIA,
in-silico, various instruments, 22 statistical contrasts in total).
An additional spike-in data set was created using a state-of-the-art
mass spectrometer to extend our benchmark analyses and support investigation
of false positive rates. Evaluation of several different types of
label-free proteomics data sets revealed that normalization algorithms
had a major impact om subsequent statistical analyses with large variability
in their performance across data sets. We introduced a novel normalization
algorithm that can be used in conjunction with other normalization
algorithms to rebalance protein foldchanges between experimental conditions,
which improved ROC performance for all evaluated normalization algorithms
in all data sets (median improvement in partial AUC over data sets
of respective algorithms was 4–20%) and strongly reduced between-data
set performance (standard deviation over data sets decreased from
0.11–0.20 of respective algorithms to 0.02–0.03). The
recently introduced DEqMS, MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe improved over the
commonly used moderated
t
test (limma eBayes) in
19 of the 22 statistical contrasts. In our generated benchmark data
set, particularly challenging due to low sample loading, short gradients
and minor spike-in foldchanges of 20 and 25%, these modern DEA algorithms
uncovered hundreds of significant hits whereas the former recovered
only a fraction thereof or none at all. Elaborate analyses of DEA
algorithm results presented here provide insights for future algorithmic
developments and generation of benchmark data sets representative
of real-world data.
Finally, MS-DAP was used to reanalyze a
large-scale Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) biofluid proteomics data set to demonstrate gain in sensitivity,
leading to potential new biomarkers, and ease of use. Cohort-specific
regulations were readily identified from data visualizations in the
MS-DAP report and incorporated in statistical analyses, resulting
in 159 unique significant hits at 0.1% FDR as compared to 43 proteins
reported in the original study. These included the vast majority of
originally reported proteins, many protein family members thereof
as well as strong overlap with results from previously reported AD
biofluid studies. Literature search uncovered AD association for 25
of the MS-DAP exclusive hits. Taken together, application of MS-DAP
yielded additional highly significant proteins that both corroborated
AD associated proteins and yielded potentially new biomarkers.
Materials and Methods
Variation Within, Mode Between
The Variation Within
(VW) and Mode Between (MB) normalization algorithm consists of two
consecutive steps; first samples are scaled within each group to minimize
variation among replicates and then scaled at sample-group-level such
that the mode of between-group log-foldchanges is zero. Input data
are a numerical input matrix where columns represent samples and rows
represent features (e.g., peptides or proteins) together with sample
group assignments for each column in this matrix.
VW: within
the subset of matrix columns that match sample group
g
, each column is scaled such that the median of variation estimates
for all rows is minimized.
MB: the foldchange between a pair
of sample groups for each feature
is computed using the respective mean value over samples within each
group. The mode thereof is computed for all pairs of sample groups.
The sum of the absolute values (FC modes) is minimized in the between-group
normalization step.
Mode Within and Mode Between (MWMB) is a
variant of the VWMB implementation
where within-group samples are normalized by their pairwise log-foldchange
modes, the between-group part of the algorithm is the same as with
VWMB.
These algorithms are included in the open-source MS-DAP
R package
and available on the MS-DAP GitHub repository. The implementation
of specifically this algorithm is available at:
https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap/blob/master/R/normalize_vwmb.R
.
To perform protein-level normalization for a peptide abundance
matrix, available in MS-DAP as normalization parameter “modebetween_protein”
(referred to as MBprot in this manuscript), first a roll up from peptide-
to protein-level is performed and then between-group scaling levels
with the “normalize_vwmb” normalization function are
computed (disabling within-group scaling).
For reference, we
also implemented a naïve approach that
minimizes variation of all peptides over the entire data set (denoted
as “var_overall”), which is effectively the VW algorithm
under the assumption that all samples belong to one sample group.
Benchmarking Data Sets
The LFQbench2016
35
data was downloaded from the PRIDE
36
repository (identifier PXD002952). The “5600”
data set refers to data acquired on a SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 configured
for SWATH-MS with 64 variable windows. Respective raw files were “HYE124_TTOF5600_64var_lgillet_L150206_<ID>”
with IDs 007–012. Analogously, the “6600” data
set refers to data acquired on a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 configured for
SWATH-MS with 64 variable windows. Respective raw files were “HYE124_TTOF6600_64var_lgillet_I150211_<ID>”
with IDs 008–013. The LFQbench2022
37
data was downloaded from the PRIDE repository (identifier PXD028735).
The O’Connell et al. data
38
was
downloaded from PRIDE repository PXD007683 (label-free quantification
raw data files only). The Shen et al. data
39
was downloaded from the PRIDE repository (identifier PXD003881).
Proteomes in FASTA format (including canonical and additional isoforms,
Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) were downloaded from UniProt (release 2022-02).
Raw data for all DDA data sets were reanalyzed using MaxQuant 2.1.1.0
with match-between-runs enabled. Raw data for all DIA data sets were
reanalyzed using DIA-NN 1.8, using in-silico predicted spectral libraries.
The in-silico data sets benchmarked in this study are based on
the Lim et al. data set
40
available at
PRIDE repository PXD014415. Samples that only contain human cells
were reanalyzed with MaxQuant, then processed as follows: (1) import
the data set into MS-DAP 1.0.3, (2) split 16 of the samples that only
contain human cells randomly into groups A and B, (3) select 10% of
the proteins at random and increase their respective peptide abundances
in group B by 1.2-fold. The result is an artificial data set with
8 replicate samples and
a priori
known differentially
expressed proteins (with real-world variation and potentially some
difficult to detect true positives due to random selection of noisy
proteins/peptides). Additionally, we created subsets of this data
set with 6 or 4 replicates, respectively.
MS-DAP version 1.0.3
was used for all benchmarking analyses. For
both LFQ bench data sets, which are 3-proteome mixtures (Human, Yeast,
E. coli
), we included the
E. coli
proteome in all data analysis steps but disregarded these for ROC
analyses because the spike-in ratio was very high (4-fold) as compared
to Human∼Yeast (2-fold, which should already be a relatively
easy test).
LC-MS
A two-proteome spike-in series was created using
50 ng HeLa per sample and adding 12.5 ng, 15.625 or 18.75 Yeast (depending
on experimental condition). Each sample of tryptic digest was redissolved
in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid; the peptide solution was transferred
to an Evotip, and run on a 15 cm × 75 μm, 1.9 μm
Performance Column (EV1112 from EvoSep) using an Evosep One liquid
chromatography system with the 30 samples per day program. Peptides
were electro-sprayed into the timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer and
analyzed with parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation combined
with diaPASEF. The MS scan was between 100 and 1700
m
/
z
. The tims settings were 1/Ko from start to end
between 0.6 and 1.6 V·s/cm
2
, ramp time 100 ms, accumulate
time 100 ms and ramp rate 9.42 Hz. The same set of samples was also
analyzed in ddaPASEF mode. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have
been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner
repository
36
with the data set identifier
PXD036134.
The Bader et al. AD-CSF biomarker data set
The Bader
et al. data set
41
was acquired from the
PRIDE repository (identifier PXD016278). The Spectronaut
17
result file in .sne format was downloaded (“main
study_three cohorts_Spectronaut session.zip”), imported into
Spectronaut and exported as a plain text report compatible with MS-DAP
1.0.3. The sample metadata table was downloaded (“annotation
of samples_AM1.5.11.zip”) and some of the columns were renamed
for compatibility with MS-DAP (filenames as “sample_id”
and sample classifications as “group”).
The decision
rules for “exclude” samples, which are included in all
MS-DAP data visualizations and quality control analyses but excluded
from differential expression analysis, were as follows: (1) lacking
either clinical AD diagnosis or biochemical AD classification (flagged
as exclude in original study), (2) inconsistency between clinical
AD diagnosis and biochemical AD classification, (3) technical replicates,
(4) samples that were clear outliers compared to respective within-group
biological replicates in the MS-DAP QC report.
MS-DAP 1.0.3
was applied with feature selection such that each
peptide is detected (Spectronaut Qvalue ≤0.01) in at least
8 samples in each sample group (
filter_min_detect = 8
), by-contrast filtering enabled (
filter_by_contrast = TRUE
), normalization set to a combination of VSN and protein-level mode-between
(
norm_algorithm = c(“vsn”, “modebetween_protein”)
), MSqRob as DEA algorithm (
dea_algorithm = “msqrob”
) and remaining settings at default. The full MS-DAP report file
contains all data visualizations, documentation thereof and the R
code used to run the pipeline (
Supporting Data 1
).
Results
Overview of MS-DAP Features
We here introduce MS-DAP,
implemented in R that facilitates reproducible proteome science by
integrating many state-of-the-art algorithms for data filtering, normalization
and differential testing (
Figure
1
). This pipeline is independent of (and compatible
with a wide range of) raw data processing software, integrates previously
published state-of-the-art algorithms and includes both quality control
and differential testing. The reporting is designed as a systematic
assessment of data set quality metrics, from individual samples to
group- and data set-wide effects, and can be copublished with proteomics
studies. The R code that is used to analyze a data set with MS-DAP
is automatically included within the PDF report as an audit log and
to facilitate accurate reproduction of the results. Custom functions
for normalization or differential expression analysis can be used
as a plugin to facilitate the development of future algorithmic innovations
(tutorials with example code are available online). Besides analysis
of proteomics data sets, this also makes MS-DAP suitable as a platform
to jump-start benchmarking studies. The pipeline is open-source and
available as an R package and Docker container at
https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap
and comes with extensive documentation.
Figure 1
Overview of the MS-DAP
workflow and data visualizations. MS-DAP
is implemented as an open-source R package and provides a standardized
solution for the analysis of label-free proteomics data sets generated
from many software platforms. The pipeline facilitates multiple stages
of quantitative data processing (filtering, normalization and stats)
and conveniences application of pre-existing algorithms while also
enabling bioinformaticians to provide custom functions (plugins) for
normalization and differential testing. A comprehensive quality control
report is generated that provides a multifaceted perspective on quality
metrics, reproducibility, potential batch-effects and visualization
of statistical results. User provided metadata describing experimental
conditions, such as wet-lab sample handling steps or mass-spectrometry
measurement order, are used to automatically generate respective quality
control figures. The report is provided as a single PDF file that
contains dozens of unique analyses, documentation thereof and information
needed to reproduce results.
Together with the integration of existing tools,
the pipeline introduces
a number of unique features. At the start of the pipeline, the goal
of feature selection is to ensure downstream statistical comparisons
between experimental conditions based on reliable data features. For
instance, peptides consistently observed throughout the data set might
be favored over those sparingly observed. Users can opt to remove
peptides identified in less than
x
% of replicates
per sample group, remove proteins with less than N peptides and/or
keep only the top M peptides per protein.
For large data sets
with many sample groups, the typical strategy
of selecting only those peptides that are consistently identified
throughout the data set may be overzealous. For example, let peptide
p
be observed in sample groups
A
and
B
but not in groups
C–E
. Selecting
only peptides observed in all groups would remove
p
while it could have potentially been used in a contrast of group
A versus B
. MS-DAP can counter this problem by applying
feature selection rules and subsequent normalization in each contrast
separately, thereby maximizing the number of reliable features.
For differential testing, MS-DAP supports statistical models that
operate on either peptide-level (e.g., MSqRob or MS-EmpiRe) or protein-level
data (e.g., eBayes or DEqMS). In addition to a
q
-value
threshold, users may also provide a foldchange threshold to define
significant hits or let MS-DAP estimate a foldchange threshold from
a permutation test.
42
MS-DAP’s flexible
framework allows users to apply a DEA of choice, or multiple DEA methods
in parallel and compare their results downstream. Besides these integrated
methods, custom functions for normalization or differential expression
analysis can be used as a plugin to facilitate benchmarking studies
and encourage inclusion of future algorithmic innovations (tutorials
with example code are available online).
Data visualization and standardized reporting
In addition
to typical quality control figures, MS-DAP automatically generates
visualizations for all user-provided sample metadata (
Figure
1
). For example, if sample metadata
denotes the preparative step used for each sample, the data visualizations
will indicate preparations that resulted in more/less identified peptides,
produced outlier samples as compared to replicates in others or whether
samples from the same preparation cluster in PCA. This allows MS-DAP
users to quickly identify potential improvements to experiment protocols
and iterate pilot experiments to evaluate improvements in terms of
reproducibility and elimination of confounding factors. Furthermore,
observed batch effects (e.g., cohorts) can be easily taken into account
in statistical analyses by modeling sample metadata as random variables
in regression models such as MSqRob or DEqMS. An example of this is
demonstrated later on in
Figure
4
.
To facilitate transparency, we favor to not
fully remove “outlier samples” from published data sets
but instead copublish these data and only omit respective samples
from statistical analyses. Users can indicate which samples should
be excluded from DEA; these samples will subsequently be highlighted
in quality control figures to provide transparency regarding the rationale
for exclusion (examples in
Figure S1
, complete
report with real-world data in
Supporting Data 1
).
The MS-DAP report also features unique visualizations
of chromatography
profiles for detecting temporary or systematic effects throughout
chromatographic retention time. These can reveal chromatographic shifts
between samples and peptide abundance alterations that correlate to
some moment in elution time (example in
Figure S1C
, complete report with real-world data in
Supporting Data 1
). Various perspectives on outlier analysis
are provided, such as identified peptide counts per sample and sample-group,
peptide abundance distributions, peptide foldchange distributions
among replicates, leave-one-out impact on within-group variation and
sample clustering by probabilistic-PCA.
Novel Mode-Between Normalization Augments Current Methods
Data normalization is a crucial preprocessing step with major impact
on statistical analysis of high-throughput omics data.
20
,
21
Prior to statistical analyses, normalization algorithms are applied
to label-free proteomics data in order to minimize variation among
samples (e.g., caused by differences in sample loading). However,
it is important that these algorithms also ensure the data set adheres
to assumptions that underly downstream statistical tests; when comparing
the abundance of a protein between two conditions, the null hypothesis
is that the two means are equal and the alternative is that they are
not. Ergo, after normalization we expect (most) proteins to have a
log foldchange of zero. The MS-EmpiRe normalization method explicitly
aims to achieve this. But commonly used algorithms like VSN, Loess
or naïve algorithms that simply minimize variation for most
proteins, do not. Especially for asymmetric data sets where the number
of up- and down-regulated proteins is not the same, this can be challenging
but normalization algorithms should be able to deal with these as
well (e.g., suppose we compare control samples to a condition with
induced cell death for a subset of cells such that the majority of
proteins remains unchanged and differential regulation is all toward
down-regulation). To inform MS-DAP users on recommended settings,
we first performed extensive benchmarking analyses of 5 normalization
algorithms; VSN,
20
Robust Linear Regression
(RLR), MS-EmpiRe’s normalization,
19
Loess
23
,
43
and an algorithm that naively minimizes
peptide variation over all samples.
We used a diverse collection
of benchmark data sets as to avoid bias in our evaluation of normalization
algorithms toward a particular data set (which might suit some algorithm
in particular). In total we included 22 statistical contrasts, originating
from published spike-in DDA and DIA proteomics data sets, a simulated
in-silico data set and a challenging data set we created in-house
with minor (20% and 25%) spike-in ratios that was measured in both
DDA and DIA mode using a Bruker timsTOF Pro 2 (
Figures
2
and
3
,
Table S1
, see further
Materials
and Methods
).
Figure 2
A novel normalization strategy included with MS-DAP rescues
deficiencies
observed in current algorithms. (A) The median value of the protein-level
log2 foldchange distributions for the subset of background proteins
represents how well centered the data set is post normalization (should
be zero, i.e., typical background proteins should not be changed between
experimental conditions). After peptide-level normalization with any
algorithm of choice, adding our protein-level mode-between normalization
(denoted here as +MBprot) strongly improved results in all data sets.
Extreme values depicted at plot limits as a triangle. (B) The normalization
performance from panel A was evaluated in the context of downstream
statistical analysis using various DEA algorithms; DEqMS after MaxLFQ
rollup, eBayes after MaxLFQ rollup, MSqRobSum, MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe.
The
x
-axis shows how far the partial Area Under Curve
(pAUC) of ROC analysis is from the best performing normalization approach
of the same data set and DEA algorithm combination (closer to zero
is better, implying other normalization algorithms do not achieved
a better pAUC score). Similar to panel A, after posthoc application
of MBprot the performance of all normalization strategies was similar
and much improved from initial application of these algorithms as-is.
In both panels A and B, each point represents one of the 22 evaluated
statistical contrasts (
Table S1
) and median
values over all contrasts are shown as vertical black lines.
Figure 3
Benchmarking differential expression analysis algorithms.
Partial
Area Under Curve (pAUC) at 95% specificity was used to quantify how
well the estimated
p
-values from each DEA algorithm
discriminated true- from false-positives in each of the 22 statistical
contrasts. The spike-in ratio between experimental conditions is included
in the label for each contrast (denoted as FC). Among this diverse
collection of data sets, MS-EmpiRe outperformed other methods most
often.
Raw data of each data set was first reanalyzed
with recent versions
of MaxQuant and DIA-NN, after which results were imported into MS-DAP
and respective normalization algorithms were selected prior to DEA
with (in parallel) eBayes, DEqMS, MS-EmpiRe and MSqRob. As a result,
we obtained a log2 foldchange and p-value from these 4 DEA methods,
for all proteins in each of the 22 statistical contrasts. Because
these are spike-in data sets, the background set of proteins (e.g.,
HeLa cells present in each sample at the same concentration) is expected
not to change between experimental conditions. However, we observed
many contrasts where the log2 foldchanges of the background proteins
were not centered around zero (
Figure
2
A).
Density plots of the log-transformed protein
foldchange distributions,
included in the MS-DAP quality control report for every statistical
test, showed that for some data sets the most frequent protein foldchange
(the mode of the log foldchange distribution) was not zero and therefore
the assumption that it is most common for proteins to be unchanged
(null hypothesis) was violated. It is hard to read this from a volcano
plot as many proteins, especially those with foldchanges close to
zero, will be drawn on top of each other so foldchange distribution
plots are a more reliable way to assess this.
We first implemented
an algorithm that scales samples such that
the variation of peptide intensity values within each group is minimized,
and then uses the peptide foldchange distribution to normalize between
groups such that the log foldchange mode is closest to zero. We refer
to this approach as Variation Within, Mode Between (VWMB). The MS-EmpiRe
paper
19
also described foldchange-based
normalization and used mode-foldchange scaling both within and between
groups, and was also applied to peptide-level abundance matrix prior
to application of the MS-EmpiRe DEA algorithm. Key differences with
our implementation include our emphasis on efficiently scaling to
many groups in large data sets and flexibility to minimize either
“variation over replicates” (VWMB) or “mode-foldchange”
(MWMB) for the initial within-group normalization step. Minimizing
variation over replicates (the within-group part of VWMB) assumes
there are no cofactors among samples within a sample-group that affect
many peptides, if there are one would risk “averaging out”
some of the biological variation in this normalization step. In which
case the MWMB variant would be more applicable, which also uses mode-foldchange
normalization for the within-group normalization and therefore might
be more robust when dealing with cofactors not included in the sample-group
definition. Furthermore, in comparison to VWMB/MWMB, MS-EmpiRe normalization
uses clustering to iteratively determine reference samples to scale
to whereas our implementation minimizes overall distance (e.g., between
all pairs of sample groups). The consequence of these different approaches
might not be revealed in homogeneous benchmarking data sets that only
have a few technical replicates and few experimental conditions.
While this worked pretty well overall, in some data sets the protein-level
log foldchange distributions obtained from statistical models were
not centered around zero. We hypothesized this might be due to a small
set of differentially expressed proteins that has a large number of
peptides, and therefore the centered peptide foldchange distribution
did not result in centered protein foldchange distributions after
application of peptide-level statistical models nor after peptide-to-protein
rollup followed by protein-level statistical models. Note that typically,
the distribution of the number of peptides per protein looks like
a power law (i.e., huge number of proteins have 1 peptide, minor set
of proteins has 10+ peptides but some proteins may have hundreds of
peptides). So, to ultimately correct for deficiencies in between-group
normalization while starting from peptide-level data, we developed
a novel normalization algorithm that scales the abundance value matrix
such that the mode of protein-level log foldchanges between sample
groups is zero (MBprot). In MS-DAP it can be used in conjunction with
existing normalization approaches, which typically aim to reduce variation
between samples, to posthoc balance protein foldchanges between groups
(denoted throughout this study as +MBprot, e.g., VSN+MBprot). Posthoc
application of our MBprot normalization algorithm strongly improved
results for all evaluated normalization algorithms, on all data sets
and statistical contrasts (
Figure
2
A).
Next, we evaluated the impact of normalization
algorithms on subsequent
differential testing between experimental conditions; spike-in proteins
should have a stronger (lower)
p
-value than background
proteins which should be unchanged between conditions. We quantified
this by computing Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for
each of the 22 statistical contrasts, for each (combination of) normalization
algorithm(s), for 4 DEA algorithms. Then we computed the partial area
under the curve (pAUC) at 95% specificity, a metric for how well the
ordered
p
-values (of some DEA algorithm in some contrast)
prioritize true- over false-positives and compared the performance
of each normalization against the best pAUC over all normalizations
(within same contrast and DEA). This allowed us to see if the improvement
that our MBprot algorithm showed in the evaluation of background foldchange
distributions (
Figure
2
A) also resulted in better background/foreground separation in DEA,
and indeed it did in all cases (
Figure
2
B). Application of MBprot on peptide-level data that
was normalized with any commonly used normalization approach improved
ROC performance over evaluated statistical contrasts, with median
improvement of ROC pAUC; MS-EmpiRe 3.93%, variance minimization 12.0%,
RLR 17.8%, VSN 19.4%. Furthermore, differences between normalization
algorithms (when evaluating the same statistical contrast) strongly
decreased (standard deviation of pAUC distances were 0.11–0.20
when using normalization algorithms as-is and 0.02–0.03 after
application of MBprot) which implied protein-level between-group scaling
was a key aspect of successful normalization throughout all evaluations,
even for data sets with only minor asymmetry such as the in-silico
generated data set.
Unfortunately, all normalization methods
may potentially introduce
unwanted bias because in real-world data sets the actual foldchange
null distribution (proteins unchanged between conditions in vivo)
is unknown and therefore it is difficult to verify (in a real-world
data set that is being analyzed) how accurately mode-between/VSN/Loess/RLR
centers the null distribution. For instance, when mode-between normalization
is applied to data sets with highly convoluted bimodal distributions
of background and foreground proteins it may slightly bias the estimation
of “zero log-foldchange” toward the foreground proteins
thereby reducing the absolute foldchange of foreground proteins and
inducing some unwanted foldchange in the set of background proteins.
Taken together, we recommend that the DEA results from every analyzed
proteomics data set are carefully inspected for off-centered log foldchange
distributions (e.g., using data visualizations included in standardized
MS-DAP reports). Regarding choice of normalization algorithms, we
recommend VSN combined with protein mode-between (MBprot) normalization
as the default starting point when analyzing a data set. However,
note that VSN tends to “shrink” foldchanges which in
practice results in slightly underestimated foldchange magnitudes.
If this is undesirable, we suggest “vwmb” (minimizes
variation within group/replicates) for data sets without (strong)
cofactors, or “mwmb” otherwise (scales the mode-foldchange
between pairs within-group samples), both should be combined with
protein mode-between (MBprot) normalization.
Imputation
Imputation of missing values is sometimes
applied in the analysis of proteomics data set, but it is difficult
to assess whether missingness in a data set is missing at random (MAR),
missing not at random (MNAR) or some combination of both (e.g., high
abundant peptides are missing at random, low abundant are more likely
to be missing not at random/left-censored). Furthermore, DIA data
sets typically have a lower fraction of missing values than DDA data
sets and it is likely that this model of missingness is different
between DDA and DIA data sets. Given a real-world data set where ground-truth
is not known, it may prove quite difficult to assess the mechanism
of missingness and subsequently select the appropriate imputation
algorithm. Consequentially, one may risk selecting an imputation method
with a different assumption on the model of missingness than the (unknown)
true generative model of the data set and thereby introduce bias.
Imputation algorithms come with their own set of assumptions, might
introduce bias and large differences in the effectiveness of various
imputation algorithms has recently been shown.
44
We have not implemented imputation in MS-DAP as of yet,
for now assuming unobserved peptides to be missing at random and let
the statistical models assess the data as is. Future extensions to
MS-DAP could implement imputation using the plugin architecture. Even
with the option of imputation, we expect it will still be beneficial
to first filter stringently as to remove peptides where most values
are missing, and then apply imputation on the remaining data set which
should have a relatively low fraction of missing values. Extensive
benchmarking across both DDA and DIA data sets, as well as interaction
of imputation methods with subsequent DEA algorithms, would be required
to establish which approach performs best over a wide range of data
sets and introduces least bias.
Benchmarking Differential Expression Analysis Algorithms: Peptide-Level
Statistical Models Are More Sensitive
After evaluation of
normalization algorithms, we proceeded with benchmarking Differential
Expression Analysis (DEA) algorithms. The same data sets and contrasts
were used, covering a wide range of label-free proteomics data sets
(DDA, DIA, slightly older and current data sets, different mass-specs
vendors, etc.), but now compared the performance of DEA algorithms
within each data set. Following results from the previous section,
we used VSN combined with protein-level mode-between normalization
(MBprot) throughout.
Comparing DEA algorithms using ROC within
each of the 22 statistical contrasts, again using the metric of partial
area under the curve (pAUC) at 95% specificity, we found that the
recently introduced algorithms DEqMS, MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe performed
better than the approach used in most proteomics pipelines, protein-level
moderated t-statistics here evaluated using the popular limma eBayes
implementation, in 19 out of 22 statistical contrasts (
Figure
3
).
For protein-level
statistical models, the method used to collapse
peptide-level data per protein (rollup) is crucial. In MS-DAP, all
data analyses start at the peptide-level, so we implemented and compared
the traditional protein summarization “sum” approach
(protein abundance = sum of respective peptide intensities per sample),
rollup by applying Tukey’s median polish (TMP) to respective
peptide*sample subsets of the data matrix, and the MaxLFQ algorithm
as provided by the iq
45
R package. Peptide
to protein rollup with both MaxLFQ and TMP systematically outperformed
the naïve “sum” approach for both eBayes and
DEqMS, whereas MaxLFQ and TMP performance was generally on par (
Supporting Data 2
).
Computation times for
eBayes and DEqMS were below 10 s on all data
sets, whereas peptide-level models MS-EmpiRe and especially MSqRob
would take 10–30 min per contrast depending on the number of
peptides (
Figure S2
). DEqMS showed consistent
improvement over the eBayes method with varying degrees of magnitude,
which was expected as the former method is an extension of the latter.
The DEqMS paper
22
reported similar results
albeit on a limited set of experimental data whereas our benchmarking
cross-compared more DEA algorithms and includes many more, and diverse,
data sets. Overall, MS-EmpiRe performed best in the ROC analyses (mean
pAUC over all contrasts improved by 5.5% as compared to eBayes) with
MSqRob (mean improvement 2.9%) and DEqMS (mean improvement 3.1%) closely
behind.
While MS-EmpiRe performed best overall and had a slight
edge over
MSqRob and DEqMS on most evaluated data sets (
Figure
3
), a major advantage to the latter two is
the flexibility to add random variables to the regression model to
account for additional experimental features such as batch effects,
while MS-EmpiRe is only suited for A/B testing. We observed a superior
performance of MS-EmpiRe mostly on DDA data sets (and less so for
DIA) and hypothesize this could relate to differences in the peptide
variation versus intensity relation, which is a crucial aspect of
the MS-EmpiRe model, that is different between these acquisition modes.
Combining the strengths of both MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe seems a promising
avenue for future work on DEA algorithms. In conclusion, our extensive
evaluation of DEA algorithms makes a strong case for updating pre-existing
proteomics workflows that still employ generic moderated t-statistics
to protein abundances in favor of recent proteomics DEA methods DEqMS,
MSqRob and/or MS-EmpiRe.
Generation of a Challenging Spike-In Benchmark Data Set
We generated in-house benchmark data sets to further evaluate DEA
algorithms under challenging conditions that may better represent
real-world experiments. We used low sample loading to both mimic “single
cell” proteomics and avoid ion suppression at saturation loadings
(60–70 ng whereas the Bruker timsTOFpro 2 could easily process
more than double the sample load), short gradients to represent high-throughput
proteomics (Evosep, 30 samples per day) and minor spike-in foldchanges
of 20, 25 and 50% to simulate foldchanges expected in biological data
sets.
The resulting data showed that it is possible to generate
DIA benchmark data sets that exhibit false-positive rates in line
with the DDA data sets (using the exact same raw data processing software
and MS-DAP settings as the LFQbench data sets). The modern DEA algorithms
DEqMS, MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe outperformed eBayes in ROC analyses in
all cases with varying degrees of magnitude (
Figure
3
) and importantly, their sensitivity was
much better. At 1% FDR, these 3 algorithms uncovered hundreds of true
positive significant hits whereas eBayes recovered only a fraction
thereof or none at all for some contrasts (
Figure S3
).
While spike-in experiments and synthetic data sets
are a common
approach to benchmark computational pipelines, as these contain both
data and ground truth which allows for evaluation of true/false-positives
and -negatives, these are not without flaws. Such benchmarking data
sets may not be representative of challenges faced in real-world experiments,
which typically have more complicated experimental designs than replicates
with only technical variation (e.g., covariates like “batch”
or “sex”) and a single ratio for all differentially
expressed proteins (e.g., more complicated foldchange distributions
for up/down-regulated proteins).
We generated an in-house benchmark
data set with reduced sample
loading and only minor foldchanges between spike-in conditions in
an attempt to better simulate mass-spectrometric conditions of differentially
expressed proteins in a benchmark data set. This data set exhibited
different characteristics compared to other benchmark data sets, such
as reduced false-positive-rates in evaluation of DEA algorithms, when
compared to other benchmark data sets.
Our results underline
the importance of the data sets used to benchmark
algorithms for normalization and DEA, and suggest more work is needed
on crafting benchmark data sets that better mimic real-world experiments.
Future research should also investigate the root cause of high false
positive rates observed here for DIA data sets by interrogating the
entire process of data acquisition, raw data processing and downstream
analyses, which might require a series of additional experiments at
increasing sample loadings and varying mass-spectrometer configurations.
MS-DAP Settings and Interpreting Results from Statistical Analyses
While ROC analyses quantify how well the (ranked)
p
-values from differential expression testing prioritize (a priori
known) true positives over false-positives, this metric may not reflect
how users ultimately interpret the data. Typical interpretations of
DEA results from proteomics studies are Geneset Enrichment Analyses
(GSEAs), which may use
p
-values as is or rank transformed
data, and researchers interpreting the top-hits from the study. However,
in most cases an arbitrary cutoff is applied to the FDR corrected
p
-values (typically 0.05, 0.01 or 0.001) and the remaining
subset of “significant hits” is then used to interpret
the study results. Hence, it is important that DEA algorithms have
well calibrated
p
-values, i.e., one expects that
a benchmark data set with a 1% FDR cutoff applied indeed yields 1%
false-positives (background proteins) and the remainder are true positives
(spike-in proteins).
We compared the number of true- and false-positive
proteins in each statistical contrast at 1% FDR cutoff for each DEA
algorithm and found that results were mostly in line with expectations
from the ROC analyses in
Figure
3
(
Figure S3
). However, some
of the DIA data sets yielded a large number of false positives at
the 1% FDR cutoff for all evaluated DEA algorithms (
Figure S3
) and results were similar for all evaluated normalization
algorithms.
A complicating factor is that the typical spike-in
benchmark data
sets generated for label-free proteomics are not perfect ground-truth,
due to a myriad of technical challenges. For instance, peptides might
be mis-identified or peak-picking might be challenging for low abundant
peptides. Or, background proteins may produce peptides that are low
abundant, or ionize poorly and therefore are have low ion intensity,
and as a result are more susceptible to ion suppression that varies
between experimental conditions due to coeluting high abundant spike-in
peptides. Both the 2016 and 2022 LFQbench data sets were 3-proteome
mixtures (Human as background, Yeast at a 2-fold ratio,
E. coli
at a 4-fold ratio). We hypothesize that high
sample complexity combined with high sample loading contributed to
the unexpected false-positive-rates observed for these data sets,
as this may lead to highly complex spectra (i.e., challenging for
raw data processing software) and increased likelihood of ion suppression
(e.g., 4-fold increase of a large set of
E. coli
peptides affects the population of background proteins).
Compared
to other DIA data sets, we observed a well-controlled
false-positive-rate with our in-house data set at low sample loading
and modest spike-in differences. Especially when additional foldchange
cutoffs were applied to the 1% FDR filtered results (
Figure S3B
). In typical proteomics data sets, as much as ∼20–30%
of proteins are quantified by only 1 peptide. At the trade-off of
losing information about this large subset of proteins, filtering
the data set such that only proteins with multiple peptides were used
for statistical analyses improved the ROC pAUC results as expected
and showed DEqMS, MSqRob and MS-EmpiRe outperformed eBayes in this
scenario as well (
Figure S4
).
Extensive
data visualizations are provided in
Supporting Data 2
which include for each statistical contrast;
log2 foldchange distributions, ROC curves for all proteins and the
subset of proteins with at least 2 peptides, bar graphs for the number
of significant true/false-positive proteins at various significance
criteria (all proteins/at least 2 peptides, with/without additional
filtering by bootstrapping estimated foldchanges).
In data sets
where researchers are concerned with inflated false-positives
from the increasingly sensitive peptide-level models as compared to,
e.g., protein-level DEqMS, we suggest to restrict DEA results to proteins
with at least 2 peptides and apply unbiased foldchange thresholds
estimated from bootstrapping procedures as an extra posthoc filter
(both filtering steps are easily performed with MS-DAP) as this combination
of stringencies controlled false positive rates very well in our challenging
in-house data set and still yielded more true positive hits than protein-level
models without these additional filters.
Informed choices have
to be made when analyzing proteomics data,
from selecting and configuring raw data processing software, to configuring
various downstream analysis steps that are here described as part
of MS-DAP, such as data filtering, normalization and differential
expression analysis. The best (combination of) tools for the job may
depend on the experiment and mass spectrometry platform. For example,
proteomics data sets may exhibit different characteristics depending
on the acquisition method, number of identified/quantified features,
experimental and biological variation, number of available replicates,
etcetera and, consequentially, data pipeline configurations that work
well for one data set may not be optimal for another.
In this
paper we have used a wide range of benchmark data sets
to evaluate algorithms integrated in MS-DAP. The methods for normalization
and DEA that were among the top-tier best performing over many tests
are our recommendation as a starting point for analyzing data sets
with MS-DAP. However, as there was no algorithm that was the single
best in every benchmark analysis we encourage MS-DAP users to make
use of its flexibility in applying various algorithms. Considering
both the interpretation of differences in statistical analysis results
between different MS-DAP configurations and a comparison of data visualizations
included in the standardized PDF reports (e.g., outlier sample analyses
and log-foldchange distribution plots), MS-DAP users can make informed
choices on adjusting the recommended settings as appropriate for their
data sets.
Reanalysis of AD Studies with MS-DAP
Benchmark data
sets with large artificial differences between experimental conditions
may not represent real-world conditions. Therefore, we turned to a
recent large-scale study by Bader et al.
41
on AD in which cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) between AD and control
cases was compared using label-free proteomics. Samples from 197 subjects
in three independent studies (cohorts) were analyzed in DIA mode and
the raw mass spectrometry data was processed with Spectronaut.
17
In the original study, statistical tests were
first applied on each cohort independently and then the subset of
proteins that differed significantly (
p
-value <
0.05, without multiple-testing correction) in each cohort was put
forth as a shortlist of 43 proteins-of-interest (Bader et al.
Figure
3
F
41
).
Reanalysis in MS-DAP was performed in a two-step
process. First, MS-DAP was applied to the Spectronaut report provided
with the original study at default settings, but without performing
DEA, to generate the MS-DAP quality control report. A few clear outlier
samples were observed, which we subsequently flagged as “exclude”
in the sample metadata Excel table that was used for further analyses
(meaning these are included in all data visualizations but excluded
from statistical analysis). For example, two outlier samples from
the AD group in the Berlin consortium, as compared to respective biological
replicates, were observed while the vast majority of all samples in
this study showed excellent reproducibility. As part of the standardized
MS-DAP quality control report (
Supporting Data 1
), a rare example of chromatographic aberration, in which
peptide abundances are shifted from expected values as a function
of retention time, was observed in one of the samples (“A6_82545313”).
This was of no effect to the outcome of the study since this sample
was not classified as either control or AD in the sample metadata
provided with the original study, thus not part of statistical analyses,
but it nicely illustrated how MS-DAP quality reporting uncovers such
aberrations.
In a second step, MS-DAP was reapplied with the
updated sample
metadata table (i.e., some samples “excluded” from DEA).
As expected, the batch effect of cohorts in this study was clearly
observed in PCA visualizations (
Figure
4
A,B), whereas age
had no pronounced effect on sample clustering (
Figure
4
A). So, in this a real-world example the
MS-DAP standardized quality control reporting effectively corroborated
a priori expected batch effects (multiple laboratories/cohorts). Related
to this, we strongly recommend users to always include relevant experimental
circumstances in the sample metadata table, and inspect these (and
other) automatically generated data visualizations to check for expected
and unexpected covariates that may need to be accounted for in statistical
analyses. The MSqRob peptide-level regression model was used to identify
differentially expressed proteins between control and AD cases using
all samples in the data set in a single analysis (apart from those
flagged as “exclude” based on QC), accounting for batch
effects by adding “cohort” as a random variable in the
regression model (simple MS-DAP parameter).
Figure 4
MS-DAP reanalysis of
the Bader et al. AD CSF biomarker data set.
(A,B) The MS-DAP report includes PCA visualizations that are automatically
color-coded by all user-provided sample metadata. In the examples
highlighted here, individuals with similar age do not cluster together
while a clustering of individuals from the same cohort is apparent
(as expected). (C) Volcano plot visualization of the differential
testing results produced by MS-DAP. The 1% FDR significance threshold
is shown as a dashed horizontal line. Proteins that reached significance
in the original study prior to multiple testing correction are highlighted
(“Bader”), together with top-hits from other recent
AD CSF proteomics studies (Zhou et al. and Higginbotham et al.). Proteins
labeled “MS-DAP” did not overlap with any of the proteins
reported by these 3 AD CSF studies. (D) Analogous to panel C, the
stacked area chart shows that previously reported top-hits from the
original Bader et al. paper and 2 other AD CSF studies are among the
highly significant proteins in our MS-DAP reanalysis of the Bader
et al. data set.
Increased sensitivity of the MS-DAP workflow, revealing
245 unique
proteins at 1% FDR and 159 highly significant at 0.1% FDR as compared
with 43 proteins-of-interest highlighted in the original study (no
multiple testing correction was applied there), was confirmed by the
detection of paralogs of proteins found in the original study and
increased overlap with related AD studies (
Figure
4
C,D).
From the set of 159 highly significant
proteins detected by MS-DAP
at 0.1% FDR, 113 did not overlap with previously reported results
from the original Bader et al. study nor with 2 other AD CSF studies
(
Figure
4
,
Table S2
). The MS-DAP exclusive hits include
20 proteins from the immunoglobulin family (30 among all significant
at 1% FDR), 2 of which were also reported by Bader et al. Where YWHAG
and YWHAZ were previously found by Bader et al., MS-DAP significant
hits included these and additional paralogs YWHAB and YWHAE. Similarly,
CAMK2B, CAMK2G and CAMK2D are all significant according to MS-DAP
whereas only CAMK2B was found by Bader and colleagues. Furthermore,
a large set of these proteins contain catalytic activities (e.g.,
MMP2
,
CTSZ
) or are enzyme inhibitors (
Serpin-A1
, -
A6
, -
A7
, -
E2
, -
F1
, -
G1
). We found
for 25 proteins (of 113 MS-DAP exclusive hits) a described association
with Alzheimer’s disease in literature (the full list is appended
to
Table S2
). For instance, macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine.
Zhang and colleagues suggest that neuronal secretion of MIF may serve
as a defense mechanism to compensate for declined cognitive function
in AD, and increased MIF level could be a potential AD biomarker.
46
Transthyretin (TTR) has been described as an
amyloid-β protein, preventing its deposition and toxicity.
47
It has been suggested to transport proteins
over the blood brain barrier using
LRP1
.
48
The
FAM3
superfamily member
FAM3C
ameliorates AD-like pathology by destabilizing the
amyloid-β precursor.
49
In the
list of MS-DAP exclusive hits just beyond the top-hits at
0.1% FDR, we also observed proteins previously associated with AD.
For instance,
SorCS2
(
q
-value 0.002)
belongs to the
Vps10p
-domain family of multiligand
receptors, and is implicated as genetic risk factor in sporadic and
autosomal dominant forms of neurodegenerative diseases, including
AD. In addition to its function in protein trafficking, the protein
may function as cell surface receptor to mediate acute responses to
proneurotrophins.
50
Expression of
C1ql3
(
q
-value 0.003) has been shown in
discrete neuronal populations to control efferent synapse numbers;
as such it may have a role in synaptic loss in AD.
51
Taken together, this application of MS-DAP to a real-world
data
set showed (1) the importance of extensive data visualizations and
inspection for covariates that should be included in statistical analyses,
(2) that the combined normalization and DEA algorithms that performed
well in benchmarking analyses in previous sections also worked well
in application to a real-world data set, resulting in increased significant
hits as well as increased overlap with related studies and AD associated
proteins and (3) that this is easily achieved by using MS-DAP.
Conclusions
We here introduced MS-DAP, a downstream
analysis pipeline for label-free
proteomics that in a transparent manner integrates commonly used and
recently published methods for normalization and statistical workflows
to facilitate reproducible proteome science. Custom functions for
normalization or differential expression analysis can be used as a
plugin to facilitate the development of future algorithmic innovations,
making MS-DAP a suitable platform to jump-start benchmarking studies.
Moreover, MS-DAP produces extensive data visualizations and automatically
generates quality control visualizations for all user-provided sample
metadata in a standardized PDF report that includes documentation.
The open-source R package is available at
https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap
.
To inform users on recommended settings to start their data
analyses,
a systematic evaluation of common approaches to normalization and
statistical analysis in label-free proteomics was performed on a large
variety of data sets and revealed key differences. In particular,
shortcomings in current normalization approaches were revealed. A
novel algorithm was made to rescue their performance in evaluated
benchmark data sets. Differential testing using protein-level moderated
t-statistics, a commonly used approach in the field, was consistently
outperformed by more recent statistical models. In particular for
challenging data sets where differences between experimental conditions
are minor, represented here by newly generated DDA and DIA spike-in
data set generated in-house, we encourage adopting modern statistical
methods.
Application of MS-DAP on data derived from large-scale
studies
of AD cerebral spinal fluid proteomics, with optimal settings derived
from our benchmark analyses, uncovered many additional significant
proteins. These included increased overlap between related AD studies
and previously reported AD associated genes demonstrating the effectiveness
and relevance of MS-DAP. Moreover, it is of interest that many of
the CSF proteins additionally detected by MS-DAP in this study seem
to have a role in the progression of the disease itself, and thus
are likely candidates for follow-up biomarker analysis.