Introduction
Methylglyoxal (MGO) is a reactive α-oxoaldehyde
byproduct
of several metabolic processes with glycolysis being a dominant source
of production. Due to the ubiquitous and reactive nature of MGO, it
has been shown to participate in nonenzymatic chemical reactions with
proteins, metabolites, and nucleic acids.
1
−
8
Moreover, the presence of two reactive carbonyl groups within this
three-carbon metabolite enables myriad inter- and intramolecular crosslinking
reactions to occur within and between these biomolecules.
9
−
11
The vast majority of published studies on MGO-mediated posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) have focused on relatively few species, such
as hydroimidazolone (MG-H1) lesions on protein arginines, likely due
to their abundance, stability, and availability of analytical tools
(e.g., polyclonal antibodies). Work with purified proteins and more
recently in native proteomes have shown that MGO can form reversible
hemithioacetal modifications
12
and stable
mercaptomethylimidazole (MICA) modifications
13
on protein cysteines. Cysteines are the most nucleophilic of the
proteinogenic amino acids and, as a result, play prominent functional
roles in many different classes of proteins, including as catalytic
centers, redox-active sensors, and mediators of dynamic protein interaction
surfaces.
14
,
15
Recently, we demonstrated in a complex mix
of nucleophiles how this nucleophilicity makes adduction of MGO to
thiols such as cysteine or glutathione the kinetically favored reaction.
4
This phenomenon likely mirrors the cellular environment
where MGO may form reversible MGO adducts with glutathione or reactive
cysteine residues on proteins. In fact, it is estimated based on both
modeling and experimental evidence that only a small percentage of
intracellular MGO—perhaps as little as 1%—exists as
free MGO at any given moment.
12
,
16
The rest is reversibly
bound to biomolecules likely in the form of hemithioacetals.
Given this reactivity landscape, we have hypothesized that, especially
under conditions of high glycolytic flux, there may be an appreciable
amount of MGO engaged in reversible modifications on a number of the
more reactive or accessible cysteine residues throughout the cell.
However, to the best of our knowledge, only a couple of examples of
functional MGO-derived cysteine modifications have been characterized
at the molecular level most notably the Cys-to-Arg MICA crosslink
in the redox sensor protein KEAP1.
13
This
crosslink involves a critical sensor cysteine (C151) of KEAP1 and
impairs KEAP1-dependent ubiquitylation and degradation of the transcription
factor NRF2. This signaling mechanism thereby links glucose metabolism
and MGO stress to a feedback response activation of critical antioxidant
genes. More recently, MICA crosslinking of tetramers of metabolic
enzyme IMPDH2 was demonstrated.
17
The modifications,
which occur between the catalytic C331 residue and one of several
arginine residues, were shown to regulate enzymatic activity of IMPDH2
in vitro though further studies exploring the cellular effects of
this mechanism are needed. Based on identification of stable inter-residue
MGO modifications on proteins like KEAP1 and IMPDH2, as well as kinetically
controlled engagement of protein- and metabolite thiols, we posited
that there likely are other examples of functional stable or reversible
MGO-derived cysteine modifications throughout the proteome. Identification
of these labile chemical events in native environments like whole
proteome or live cells, however, remains a significant challenge in
the field of proteomics. Proteome-wide, quantitative profiling of
MGO-derived cysteine modifications is virtually impossible using traditional
LC–MS/MS-based proteomic approaches. No antibodies or other
techniques currently exist for enrichment of hemithioacetal or MICA
modifications. Additionally, the distinct chemical natures of these
modifications may pose challenges to production of pan-specific antibodies.
Most importantly, MGO-dependent hemithioacetals are fairly labile
and would most likely not survive enrichment or sample processing
steps intact.
Efforts to systematically identify MGO modifications
at specific
sites within proteins have predominately relied on the use of nonnatural
MGO surrogates, like alkynylated dicarbonyl probes.
18
,
19
While these studies have identified numerous sites of MGO modification,
neither is capable of reporting on reversible modifications at nucleophilic
residues like cysteine. Therefore, we sought to apply a competitive
chemoproteomic profiling approach to detect, quantify, and prioritize
potential sites of reversible or irreversible modification with cysteines
in cancer cell proteomes.
Results and Discussion
Proteome-Wide Detection
of MGO-Mediated Cysteine Engagement
Although MGO is known
to modify cysteine residues either through
reversible hemithioacetals or through stable MICA modifications, both
are challenging to identify via traditional proteomic profiling. To
identify sites of MGO modification proteome-wide, we employed a competitive
reactivity profiling approach using the cysteine specific probe iodoacetamide
alkyne (IA-alkyne). IA-alkyne covalently modifies free reactive cysteine
residues via nucleophilic displacement of the iodine by the cysteine
side chain thiolate. The resulting alkylated cysteine is chemically
stable, enabling bio-orthogonal labeling of the pendant alkyne with
a fluorophore for intact protein visualization by gel electrophoresis,
or labeling with retrieval moieties like biotin or desthiobiotin for
protein- or peptide-level enrichment and analysis by LC–MS/MS
proteomics. In principle, covalent interactions between protein cysteines
and MGO should be detectable so long as the residence time significantly
prevents covalent labeling by IA-alkyne (
Figure
1
A). We further reasoned that three scenarios
could be detected using this approach: (1) significant occlusion of
IA-alkyne labeling of a specific cysteine caused by direct MGO modification
in lysates or cells, (2) altered IA-alkyne labeling of one or more
cysteines due to MGO engagement at distal, allosteric sites on the
target protein, and (3) negligible or suitably short-lived MGO engagement
of specific protein cysteines, resulting in no significant effect
on IA-alkyne engagement (
Figure
1
B). We first tested whether acute MGO treatment of
whole, homogenized HeLa proteome appreciably altered IA-alkyne labeling
as measured by fluorescence gel electrophoresis following [3+2] Huisgen
“click” labeling of alkyne-labeled proteins with rhodamine
azide (
Figure S1
). Intriguingly, MGO treatment
followed by a short incubation with IA-alkyne resulted in significant,
dose-dependent reduction of IA-labeled protein cysteines (
Figure
1
C). Extended treatment
with IA-alkyne, on the other hand, largely alleviated MGO competition,
suggesting that while many accessible cysteine residues are capable
of forming reversible (e.g., hemithioacetal) modifications with MGO,
the majority of these sites are in rapid equilibrium and will ultimately
be outcompeted by the irreversible IA-alkyne modification at longer
timepoints (
Figure
1
C). Competitive treatment of HeLa lysates with an intermediate concentration
of IA-alkyne after pretreatment with MGO demonstrated that even using
relatively long IA-alkyne incubations (1 h), there were several apparent
bands competed by MGO, including some with different dose–response
profiles (
Figure
1
D).
These data suggested that a subset of protein cysteines may be either
irreversibly modified by MGO or engaged in kinetically trapped reversible
modifications resulting in longer residence times and, by extension,
increased potential for functional effects on those proteins and pathways.
Figure 1
Chemoproteomic
detection of MGO modifications on protein cysteines.
(A) Indirect cysteine reactivity profiling with iodoacetamide alkyne
(IA-alkyne). Methylglyoxal (MGO)-modified cysteines, i.e., reversible
hemithioacetal or stable MICA modifications, do not engage with the
IA-alkyne probe. (B) Schematic depicting the possible modes of MGO-regulated
cysteine engagement with the IA-alkyne probe. (C) Fluorescent gel
electrophoresis of HeLa lysates pretreated with 0.25 or 1 mM MGO for
1 h followed by IA-alkyne probe (100 μM) treatment for the indicated
time points. (D) Fluorescent gel electrophoresis of HeLa lysates treated
with IA-alkyne probe (0–200 μM) for 1 h (left) or pretreated
with MGO (0–1 mM) followed by IA-alkyne (100 μM, 1 h;
right). Arrowheads highlight bands competed by MGO in a dose-dependent
manner. Lysates in C and D were labeled with rhodamine azide for in-gel
fluorescence visualization. Coomassie staining was performed as a
loading control.
To generate a proteome-wide,
quantitative, and
site-specific profile
of MGO-modified cysteine residues, we adapted a SILAC-based competitive
IA-alkyne profiling workflow (
Figure
2
A).
14
,
20
,
21
Pairs of isotopically “heavy” and “light”
lysates from multiple cell lines were pulse-treated with MGO or vehicle
followed by an IA-alkyne chase treatment. Subsequent click chemistry
mediated labeling of alkyne-labeled proteins with a cleavable diazo
biotin azide linker permitted selective capture and release of peptides
modified by the IA-alkyne probe (
Figure S1
). Following enrichment on streptavidin-coated agarose beads, probe-labeled
peptides were eluted and analyzed by LC–MS/MS proteomics. In
this workflow, the SILAC ratio of the untreated versus treated samples
for each cysteine residue yields an estimated percent occupancy of
MGO. Measurements of free MGO have typically shown it in the low micromolar
range; however, the vast majority of cellular MGO is reversibly bound
to biomolecular nucleophiles such as cysteine residues.
12
Approaches that have accounted for this reversibly
bound pool of MGO indicate a true cellular concentration potentially
as high as 300 μM.
16
Given these
wide estimates of cellular MGO concentration, as well as the clear
propensity for the irreversible IA-alkyne labeling event to outcompete
a potentially reversible MGO modification, balanced with the inherent
need for high IA-alkyne labeling efficiency for target cysteine detection
and quantification, we used a relatively high concentration of MGO
(1 mM) for competitions with the goal of identifying the most highly
altered cysteines in several cell lines. Using this approach, we quantified
the extent of MGO modification of 7752 unique cysteine residues in
treated lysates from HEK293, HeLa, and HCT116 cancer cells (
Figure
2
B,
Datasets 1–3
). We categorized cysteines as appreciably
affected by MGO as having greater than a 2.5-fold MGO-to-vehicle SILAC
ratio in two or more cell lines (
Figure
2
C–F); the vast majority of detected
cysteines were not appreciably competed by MGO. Among the 3176 sites
that were quantified in multiple cell lines and more than 1000 quantified
in all three cell lines, only 86 cysteines (2.7%) were significantly
competed under these conditions (
Figure
2
F). Within this group, there were notable
cysteines present in diverse protein families from distinct subcellular
locations and organelles and in a wide range of absolute abundance.
Significant competition was observed at cysteines in several metabolic
enzymes, including lactate dehydrogenase (LDHA) C131, cytosolic serine
hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT1) C204, acetoacetyl coenzyme A (CoA)
acetyltransferase 1 (ACAT1) C126, and others. Additionally, there
were many MGO-regulated sites observed on enzymes involved in regulation
of PTMs and nucleotide modification, including ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme E2 C (UBE2C) C114, serine palmitoyltransferase 2 (SPTLC2) C19,
protein phosphatase 1G (PPM1G) C241, DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase
1 (DNMT1) C41, and others. Structural analysis of identified cysteines
revealed a number of these sites for which modification would be predicted
to directly inhibit enzymatic function, including the catalytic C126
residue of ACAT1, the active site C204 residue of SHMT1 for which
covalent modification has been shown to inhibit protein function,
22
and the catalytic C114 residue of ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme UBE2C.
Figure 2
Proteome-wide profiling of MGO-IA-alkyne competition at
functional
cysteines. (A) Workflow of IA-alkyne SILAC LC–MS/MS profiling
experiments to quantify MGO regulation of cysteine residues in a proteome-wide
manner. (B) Venn diagram of unique, quantified cysteine residues in
lysates from HEK293, HCT116, and HeLa cancer cells. (C–E) Waterfall
plots of IA-alkyne-labeled cysteine residue SILAC ratios for HEK293
(C), HCT116 (D), and HeLa (E) lysates treated for 2 h with 1 mM MGO
or vehicle at 37 °C. Data points shown are mean SILAC ratio derived
from
n
= 4 biological replicates each. (F) Heatmap
of the ratios of all unique sites quantified in lysates from multiple
cell lines in IA-alkyne SILAC proteomic profiling experiments. Sites
that showed a SILAC ratio of vehicle over MGO treated >2.5 in more
than one cell line are highlighted. Gray boxes denote no data for
that site/condition pair.
Notably absent in all of these data sets was C151
of KEAP1, which
we and others have previously shown to interact with MGO and other
electrophiles.
13
,
23
Several other cysteine residues
from KEAP1, including C288, C297, and C319, were detected and quantified
each in a single cell line with C319 being highly competed with a
ratio of 40 in HEK293 cells. Despite its well characterized nucleophilicity,
C151 is not detected in many previous proteomic profiling studies,
14
,
21
,
24
KEAP1 is a low abundance protein,
25
and C151 is particularly sensitive to oxidation,
which would also block labeling by IA-alkyne. This suggests that there
are likely other MGO-regulated cysteines that were not amenable to
profiling by this method due to low abundance, poor tryptic peptide
characteristics, or particular sensitivity of the cysteine to oxidation,
which would be exacerbated upon cell lysis. For example, the active
site C53/C52 of peroxiredoxin proteins PRDX1/2, which are transiently
oxidized to sulfenic acid during the protein catalytic cycle, is also
not detected. Conversely, the resolving cysteine residues C172/C171
of PRDX1/2 are both detected and not seen to be MGO-regulated in these
data sets.
Motif analysis of sites that showed a competition
ratio of 2.5
or greater in more than one cell line revealed no strong trends, suggesting
that the primary sequence surrounding the cysteine residues did not
play a significant role in determining their reactivity toward methylglyoxal
(
Figure S2A
). Conversely, secondary structure
analysis of the sequences within which the cysteine residues were
contained showed enrichment in unstructured loop regions around top
competed sites as compared to all sites that were quantified in more
than one cell line (
Figure S2B
). This trend
correlated with the observation that top competed cysteine residues
were more likely to be solvent-exposed and in disordered regions of
proteins compared to all cysteines profiled (
Figure S2C
).
MGO-Dependent Regulation of Functional Cysteines
in Metabolic
Enzymes
We next sought to interrogate MGO engagement of cysteines
in live cells. We reasoned that the combination of reversible covalent
modification and extended processing time to lyse and chase with the
irreversible IA-alkyne probe may only capture the most stable, affected
sites in the proteome. We also aimed to capture direct MGO interactions
with protein cysteines, rather than downstream effects due to extended
changes in the redox environment and/or signaling.
13
,
21
To identify relevant time courses for formation of protein modifications
in cells, we measured the kinetics of MGO-mediated modification of
cellular glutathione in cells. Treatment of live HeLa cells with MGO
resulted in rapid accumulation of lactoylglutathione and the MICA
crosslink between arginine and glutathione, which peaked within approximately
2 h (
Figure S3 and Table S1
). In total,
reduced glutathione and free arginine levels were not significantly
affected across these and other timepoints out to 8 h (
Figure S3
). Taken together, these results suggested
a 2-h treatment time for cell-based treatment and subsequent proteomic
profiling would be optimal for monitoring formation of MGO modifications
on cysteine residues. Similar to other studies in the literature,
we exposed live HeLa cells to a high-dose pulse of MGO to account
for the low efficiency of MGO exposure in the cell
13
,
18
,
26
,
27
and to maintain
high-occupancy of relevant cysteines that will endure cellular lysis,
IA-alkyne chase, and subsequent proteomic processing for LC–MS/MS
profiling (
Figure
3
A–C). We reproducibly detected and quantified SILAC competition
ratios from 3206 unique protein cysteines, among which a significantly
smaller fraction (∼4%) was significantly competed relative
to our lysate-based profiling experiments (
Figure
2
B–E,
Dataset 4
). This was expected given the likelihood of reversible modifications
being lost during the extended processing time.
Figure 3
MGO modifies active site
cysteine residues of metabolic enzyme
ACAT1. (A) Schematic depicting comparative MGO treatment workflow
for “in vitro” vs “in situ” proteomics
samples. (B) Distribution of all cysteines and top competed cysteine
residues with a ratio >2.5 in IA-alkyne SILAC experiments with
HeLa
lysate (“in vitro”) and HeLa cells (“in situ”)
treated with MGO or vehicle across proteins localized to the indicated
subcellular compartments. (C) Waterfall plot graphs of IA-alkyne-labeled
cysteine residue SILAC ratios for HeLa cells treated for 2 h with
2 mM MGO or vehicle at 37 °C with cysteine residues from ACAT1
highlighted. (D) Representative chromatograms of labeled peptides
of ACAT1 from IA-alkyne SILAC experiments with HeLa lysate and HeLa
cells treated with MGO or vehicle. (E) Structure of ACAT1 active site,
depicting acetylated C126 with cysteine residues quantified in IA-alkyne
proteomics experiments highlighted (PDB accession: 2F2S). (F) Dose-dependent
competition of ACAT1 and IA-alkyne by MGO in vitro. Recombinant ACAT1
(0.05 mg/mL) was pretreated with indicated concentrations of MGO for
2 h followed by IA-alkyne treatment for 30 min.
Broad comparison of all detected cysteines and
those that were
significantly competed by MGO showed essentially identical subcellular
localization distribution in both our in vitro and in situ profiles
from HeLa cells with cytosolic proteins representing ∼50% in
each group (
Figure
3
B). As with the in vitro profile, top competed cysteine residues
in situ with a ratio greater than 2.5 were more likely to be present
in solvent-exposed and disordered regions of proteins than all cysteines
profiled (
Figure S4A,B
). Whereas the most
competed cysteines in vitro were enriched in unstructured loop regions,
this trend was less defined in the more restricted in situ data set
(
Figure S4C
).
Analysis of in vitro
and in situ data sets identified some protein
cysteines that were consistently and significantly competed by MGO,
potentially representing more stable and functionally relevant sites
of modification (
Figure
3
D). Near the top of this list was the metabolic protein acetyl-coenzyme
A acetyltransferase ACAT1 (not to be confused with acyl-coenzyme A:
cholesterol acyltransferase also known as SOAT1), which contains IA-alkyne-labeled
cysteines within and adjacent to its active site (
Figure
3
E). The active site residue
C126 is known to perform a trans-thioesterification with its substrate
AcAc-CoA, resulting in an enzyme-bound acetyl-thioester. C126 was
among the top MGO-competed residues in both in vitro and in situ data
sets (
Figures
2
F and
3
C,D). Two proximal cysteines in the ACAT1 catalytic
center, C196 and C413, were also significantly competed by MGO. By
contrast a solvent-exposed cysteine, C119, was detected but not competed
in either in vitro or in situ data sets (
Figure
3
C–E), confirming that the high-degree
of competition of active site residues is specific to those sites
and not a general phenomenon. Pulse-chase treatment of recombinant
ACAT1 with MGO and IA-alkyne followed by gel-based visualization confirmed
appreciable and dose-dependent competition of cysteines by MGO (
Figure
3
F). The partial reduction
of aggregate, IA-alkyne-labeled ACAT1 signal at low doses suggests
that moderate local concentrations of MGO in cells may reversibly
modify C126 in cells. Given the lack of proximal arginine residues
capable of forming a MICA crosslink in the active site of ACAT1, we
speculated that the MGO modification of the active site cysteines
was likely a reversible, hemithioacetal modification. To interrogate
this reversibility, we incubated recombinant ACAT1 with a MGO and
IA-alkyne pulse-chase approach and compared the effect of a buffer-exchange
wash out step after the MGO treatment. We observed recovery of IA-alkyne
labeling post-wash-out, which supports the reversibility of this modification
at active site cysteines in ACAT1 (
Figure S5
). Finally, we confirmed that MGO inhibited the consumption of AcAc-CoA
and Ac-CoA production in a real-time kinetic substrate assay and endpoint
LC–MS detection of Ac-CoA production, respectively (
Figure
4
A–C). These
experiments together showed that MGO had the ability to inhibit ACAT1
activity in vitro and potentially the propensity to do so in cells.
CoA does contain a free thiol, which could also interact with MGO
and contribute to its inhibition of ACAT1 activity. However, it is
probable that CoA with a p
K
a
of 9.8
28
would be far less reactive toward MGO than the
ACAT1 cysteine where the catalytic dyad of its active site cysteine
could lead to a thiol with a p
K
a
as low
as three.
29
Particularly in the cellular
environment, where there is an abundance of glutathione with a thiol
p
K
a
of 8.6,
30
it is unlikely that CoA would be appreciably modified by MGO or
that MGO modification of CoA would be a driving factor behind inhibition
of ACAT1 activity.
Figure 4
Methylglyoxal modification regulates ACAT1 activity. (A)
Connections
between ACAT1 and mevalonate pathway, as well as a proposed model
of mevalonate pathway metabolite accumulation as a result of MGO inhibition
of ACAT1 activity. (B) Relative consumption of AcAc-CoA by recombinant
ACAT1 treated with 2 mM MGO (red) or vehicle (black). (C) LC–MS
quantification of Ac-CoA produced by recombinant ACAT1 within time
course studies after pretreatment with 2 mM MGO or vehicle. (D) LC–MS
quantification of indicated metabolites in HeLa cells treated with
MGO (2 mM) or vehicle for 4 h. (E,F) LC–MS quantification of
mevalonate-5-phosphate (E) and mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate (F) in HeLa
cells treated with MGO (2 mM) at the indicated time points. (G,H)
LC–MS quantification of mevalonate-5-phosphate (G) and mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate
(H) in HeLa cells treated with GLO1 inhibitor BBGC (20 μM) at
the indicated time points. Data are mean ± S.E.M. from
n
= 8 (B,G,H) or 4 (C,E,F) independent biological replicates.
Statistical analysis in B and C is by one-sided unpaired Student’s
t
-test. Statistical analysis in E–H is by two-sided
unpaired Student’s
t
-test comparing individual
timepoints to their corresponding 0-h control. *
p
< 0.05; **
p
< 0.01; ***
p
< 0.001; and ****
p
< 0.0001.
Another target protein highlighted across our data
sets was the
central glycolytic enzyme, GADPH, which connects upper and lower glycolysis
through metabolism of
d
-glyceraldehyde phosphate (GAP). MGO
modulation of GAPDH activity has been demonstrated in the literature,
albeit without a confirmed molecular mechanism,
31
,
32
and GAPDH catalysis relies on an active cysteine–histidine
dyad comprised of C152 & H179 similar to ACAT1 (
Figure S6A
). Intriguingly, significant MGO competition was
observed at a 37 kDa band matching GAPDH in our in vitro MGO profiling
experiments (
Figure
1
C,D), and MGO competition at C152 in GAPDH was observed in our proteomic
profiling studies (
Datasets 1–3
).
Pulse-chase treatment of recombinant GAPDH with MGO followed by IA-alkyne
confirmed that reversible modification of one or more cysteines in
GAPDH does occur in vitro, and this coincides with reduced GAPDH activity
in enzymatic assays (
Figure S6B,C
).
MGO Promotes
Metabolic Switching by Targeting Key Metabolic
Enzymes
ACAT1 catalyzes the cleavage of acetoacetyl-co-enzyme
A (AcAc-CoA) to produce two acetyl-CoA (Ac-CoA) groups in conjunction
with the consumption of a free CoA molecule
33
(
Figure
4
A). In cells,
AcAc-CoA can be produced by β-oxidation of even chain fatty
acids
34
and is utilized primarily by one
of two pathways. The first is the conversion of AcAc-CoA to two Ac-CoA
molecules. The second is the utilization of AcAc-CoA and a molecule
of Ac-CoA by HMG-CoA synthase (HGMCS) to produce HMG-CoA, which is
subsequently utilized by the mevalonate pathway for cholesterol and
isoprenoid biosynthesis
35
(
Figure
4
A). We hypothesized that reversible
inhibition of ACAT1 by MGO could cause prioritized conversion of AcAc-CoA
into the mevalonate pathway. Likewise, GAPDH regulates the flow of
the triosephosphates GAP and DHAP—both precursors to MGO—into
lower glycolysis. To determine whether the observed MGO regulation
of functional cysteines in ACAT1 and/or GAPDH impacts metabolism in
cells, we performed kinetic LC–MS analyses of metabolites in
these connected pathways following cellular treatment with MGO under
conditions that mirrored in situ chemoproteomic profiling experiments.
First, we observed a significant increase in the levels of upper
glycolytic metabolites following MGO treatment of HeLa cells, which
could be consistent with localized MGO inhibition of GAPDH and perhaps
central/lower glycolytic enzymes. In particular, the substrate of
GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP), was increased more than fourfold
at the 2 h mark following MGO treatment (
Figures
4
D and
S8B,C and Table S2
). To corroborate the potential regulation of glycolysis
by MGO in cells, we measured the effect of MGO treatments on bulk
metabolic fluxes using Seahorse profiling in HeLa cells. MGO treatment
led to dose-dependent reduction in extracellular acidification rate
(ECAR)—a measure of glycolytic flux—consistent with
steady state metabolomics that show buildup of central glycolytic
metabolites around GAPDH (
Figure S7
).
We also observed significant changes in mevalonate pathway metabolites
mevalonate-5-phosphate (MVAP) and mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate (MVAPP)
following MGO treatment (
Figure
4
E,F). The 3–4-fold accumulation of MVAP and
MVAPP observed upon MGO treatment is consistent with MGO inhibition
of ACAT1, resulting in increased utilization of AcAc-CoA by HMGCS
toward mevalonate pathway biosynthesis. We speculate that steady state
levels of MVAP and MVAPP are particularly increased due to the fact
that mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate decarboxylase, the enzyme that converts
MVAPP to isopentenyl diphosphate, is a rate-limiting step of the mevalonate
pathway.
36
To confirm that this mechanism
occurs under physiologically relevant MGO concentrations and kinetics,
we treated cells with
S
-
p
-bromobenzylglutathione
cyclopentyl diester (BBGC), a small molecule inhibitor of GLO1 that
will increase endogenous MGO. As with exogenous MGO treatment, we
observed significant and time-dependent increases in MVAP and MVAPP
levels upon BBGC treatment (
Figure
4
G,H). These experiments together suggest that MGO regulation
of ACAT1 does redirect metabolic flux into the mevalonate pathway
though it is conceivable that there are other contributing factors
that have yet to be elucidated. Intriguingly, we did not observe significant
accumulation of glycolytic metabolites after BBGC treatment (
Figure S8D–F
), suggesting that the MGO-mediated
effects on glycolytic flux may result from a combination of partial
inhibition of GAPDH and one or more adjacent glycolytic enzymes by
MGO, as has been previously observed by coordinated acetylation and
phosphoglyceration.
37
,
38
Notably, BBGC inhibition of GLO1
will result in increased endogenous MGO but reduced levels of lactoyl-glutathione,
which has been shown to cause acylation of lysine residues within
glycolytic enzymes and may contribute to disparate effects of MGO
vs BBGC on glycolytic metabolite levels (
Figure S8A
). Collectively, these results confirm that MGO-mediated
modifications impact metabolite flow through key pathways likely through
the action of multiple interconnected modifications as in the case
of glycolysis and through reversible cysteine modulation observed
for ACAT1 and mevalonate pathway metabolism.
Discussion
In
this study, we generated the first proteome-wide
map of MGO-dependent cysteine modification both in vitro and in situ.
Reactive cysteines were enriched for similar groups of proteins and
structural elements in both data sets. These data demonstrated that
structural and steric considerations played a larger role than expected
in defining the overall landscape of MGO reactivity toward cysteine
residues. We anticipate that this insight into reactivity trends and
discovery of specific sites of cysteine regulation by MGO will aid
in future studies of the proteins and pathways that sense and respond
to altered metabolic and redox states in cells.
39
While this represents a deep look into the reactive
profile of MGO, there are clear limitations present in our data set,
which likely extend to future attempts to detect reversible metabolite
modifications in cells. First, there are known redox-regulated proteins
and specific sites that are not observed in our profiles, including
sensor residues in KEAP1 and PRDX1/2. The reliance upon lysate-based
labeling with IA-alkyne requires interrogation of the proteome in
a nonnative, oxidizing environment, and therefore there are likely
many sites that could interact with MGO that are not observed using
this approach. Second, the dynamic reversibility of cysteine-MGO engagement
combined with our use of an irreversible chemical probe to report
on cysteine engagement (IA-alkyne) is likely to miss some rapidly
reversible modifications. This prompted us to use relatively high
MGO doses and short labeling time points. For some reactive cysteine
hotspots, like the active site residues in ACAT1, the presence of
multiple, proximal nucleophiles may lead to more stable reversible
adducts that render them more detectable in this format (
Figure
3
E). These sites may
represent a kinetic middle ground between rapidly reversible sites
and irreversible dinucleophile adducts like MICA modifications.
4
,
13
Additionally, reversible covalent inhibitors are showing promise
as chemical probes
40
and recently approved
drugs, such as the SARS-CoV-2 protease inhibitor Nirmatrelvir.
41
Expanded efforts to map the interaction landscape
of reversible modifications are thus warranted.
We showed that
this profiling approach was able to identify functional
regulation of cysteine residues, notably the catalytic residues of
metabolic enzyme ACAT1. MGO inhibited the activity of ACAT1 in vitro
and altered metabolite levels in cells in a manner consistent with
inhibition of ACAT1, as well as glycolytic enzyme GAPDH. The altered
utilization of AcAc-CoA produced by β-oxidation that is induced
by MGO inhibition of ACAT1 represents a potentially important regulatory
mechanism. Under conditions of high glycolytic flux during which higher
levels of MGO might accumulate, there is likely already sufficient
Ac-CoA being produced to fuel the TCA cycle. Thus, it may be beneficial
to instead utilize the AcAc-CoA for biosynthesis. Conversely, when
there are lower levels of glycolysis and therefore less MGO, the increased
ACAT1 activity provides additional Ac-CoA from β-oxidation to
sustain the TCA cycle. Collectively, the dynamic and reversible modification
of several key cysteines connecting glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation,
mevalonate synthesis, and the TCA cycle represents a concerted mechanism
by which cells might tune metabolism in response to relative availabilities
of key substrates. These and other regulatory sites could be markers
of or contributors to diseases characterized by dysregulated glycolysis,
such as diabetes and cancer. Further characterization of this and
other MGO responsive pathways represent potential opportunities for
therapeutic interventions that leverage the increased reliance of
many cancers on glycolysis.
Materials
and Methods
All reagents were from Sigma
Aldrich, and all bulk solvents were
from Thermo Fisher Scientific unless otherwise stated.
Cell Culture
HEK293, HeLa, and HCT116 cells were purchased
from ATCC and were propagated in RPMI 1640 with 2 mM glutamine supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco).
SILAC labeling was performed by growing cells for at least five passages
in lysine and arginine free RPMI 1640 Media for SILAC with 2 mM glutamine
supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(Gibco). “Light” and “heavy” media were
supplemented with natural lysine and arginine (0.1 mg/mL) and equimolar
13
C,
15
N-labeled lysine and arginine, respectively.
IA-Alkyne In Vitro Competition Samples
HeLa, HEK293,
or HCT116 cells were washed with PBS buffer collected by scraping
in PBS buffer, resuspended in PBS buffer containing EDTA-free complete
protease inhibitors (Roche), and sonicated (Fisher Scientific FB-505)
for 15 s (30% amplitude, 1 s on, and 1 s off). Insoluble debris was
cleared by a 15-min centrifugation at 16,000
g
and
4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay,
and samples were diluted to 2 mg/mL with PBS buffer containing EDTA-free
complete protease inhibitors.
For IA-alkyne kinetic competition
in
Figure
1
C, HeLa
lysate samples were treated for 1 h with 0, 0.25, or 1 mM MGO at 37
°C followed by treatment with 100 μM IA-alkyne (10 mM stock
in DMSO) at RT in the dark for 5, 10, 20, or 30 min. 5 mM iodoacetamide
(0.5 M stock) was added, and the samples were incubated for an additional
30 min in the dark.
For IA-alkyne dose–response competition
in
Figure
1
D, HeLa
lysate samples were
treated for 2 h with 0, 0.05, 0.25, 0.5, or 1 mM MGO at 37 °C
followed by 1-h treatment with 0, 1, 10, 50, or 200 μM of IA-alkyne
(10 mM stock in DMSO) for untreated lysates and 100 μM IA-alkyne
for MGO dose–response competition samples at RT in the dark.
For SILAC proteomics, 1 mM MGO treatment or vehicle was added to
1 mL of 2 mg/mL paired SILAC samples, with half the paired samples
receiving MGO treatment on the “light” samples and half
receiving MGO treatment on the “heavy” samples. 100
μM IA-alkyne was used for both conditions in each paired sample.
Rhodamine Labeling and Imaging
For in-gel fluorescence
readout, 50 μL of MGO- and IA-alkyne-treated lysate were reacted
with 1 μL of 50 mM CuSO
4
, 1 μL of 50 mM TCEP-HCl,
3 μL of 1.67 mM TBTA in 4:1
t
-butanol/DMSO,
and 1 μL of rhodamine azide (1 mM stock in DMSO) at RT for 1
h. The samples were diluted into 4× Laemmli buffer containing
100 mM βME. Samples were prepared for SDS-PAGE by heating to
95 °C for 5 min, cooled to RT, resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel,
and imaged on a BioRad ChemiDoc MP Imager.
IA-Alkyne In Situ Competition
Samples
SILAC HeLa cells
were grown to confluence in 15 cm plates. Paired SILAC plates were
treated with 8 mL of 2 mM MGO or vehicle in corresponding SILAC RPMI
for 2 h, with half the paired samples receiving MGO treatment on the
“light” samples and half receiving MGO treatment on
the “heavy” samples. Cells were washed with PBS buffer
collected by scraping in PBS buffer, resuspended in PBS buffer containing
EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors (Roche), and sonicated (Fisher
Scientific FB-505) for 15 s (30% amplitude, 1 s on, and 1 s off).
Insoluble debris was cleared by a 15-min centrifugation at 16,000
g
and 4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined
by Bradford assay, samples were diluted to 2 mg/mL with PBS buffer
containing EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors, and 1 mL of each
sample was kept. Samples were then treated with 100 μM IA-alkyne
at RT in the dark for 1 h.
Sample Processing for Site of Labeling IA-Alkyne
Proteomics
Following IA-alkyne labeling, 1 mL of lysate from
each condition
was reacted with 20 μL of 50 mM CuSO
4
, 20 μL
of 50 mM TCEP-HCl, 60 μL of 1.67 mM TBTA in 4:1
t
-butanol/DMSO, and 10 μL of diazo biotin azide (Click Chemistry
Tools and 10 mM stock in DMSO) at RT for 1 h. Corresponding “light”
and “heavy” samples were pooled and proteins precipitated
via CHCl
3
/MeOH precipitation. Briefly, pooled samples were
combined with 2 mL of H
2
O, 4 mL of MeOH, and 1 mL of CHCl
3
and centrifuged at 3000
g
for 20 min, yielding
a protein pellet suspended between solvent layers. Both solvent layers
were removed, the pellet was resuspended in MeOH, the samples were
centrifuged for 5 min at 9000
g
, and the supernatant
was removed. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 1 mL of 8 M
urea in PBS. 10 μL of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and
the samples were heated at 65 °C for 15 min. Samples were allowed
to cool to RT. 80 μL of 0.5 M iodoacetamide was added and the
samples were incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. Samples were
diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with addition of PBS,
and 100 μL of prewashed streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) was added and then incubated with end over end rotation
at RT for 2 h. The streptavidin beads were washed five times with
10 mL of 1 M urea in PBS and then resuspended in 200 μL of 2
M urea in 25 mM NH
4
HCO
3
. Samples were supplemented
with 1 mM MgCl
2
using a 100 mM stock solution in water
and then subjected to trypsin-mediated proteolysis with 2 μg
of sequencing grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 16 h at
37 °C. The streptavidin beads were separated from the supernatant
via Micro Bio-Spin column (BioRad) and washed 10 times with 300 μL
of PBS. The beads were resuspended in 200 μL of 50 mM Na
2
S
2
O
4
in PBS and incubated at RT for
1 h to elute the bound site of labeling peptides. The supernatant
was collected using Micro Bio-Spin column, and the process was repeated
twice. The peptides were desalted using 100 μL Pierce C18 tips
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) or self-packed stage tips with C18 SPE
(Sigma Aldrich) according to manufacturer’s protocol and then
dried via lyophilizer.
LC–MS/MS Analysis Proteomics
LC–MS/MS
analysis for HeLa proteomics samples was performed with an Easy-nLC
1000 ultra-high-pressure LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using
a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm; 2 μm, 100
Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 45 °C. The LC system
was coupled to a Q Exactive HF orbitrap and Easy-Spray nanosource
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A was composed of H
2
O supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was composed
CH
3
CN supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The instrument
was run at 0.3 μL/min with the following gradient: 2% Buffer
B (0–5 min); 2–5% Buffer B (5–6 min); 5–30%
Buffer B (6–246 min); 30–90% Buffer B (246–247
min); 90% Buffer B (247–257 min); and 90–2% Buffer B
(257–260 min). MS/MS spectra were collected from 0 to 260 min
using a data-dependent, top-10 ion setting with the following details:
full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, scan range
of 300–1650
m
/
z
, maximum
IT of 20 ms, AGC target of 3e6, and data collection in profile mode.
MS2 scans were performed by HCD fragmentation with a resolution of
60,000, AGC target of 1e5, maximum IT of 120 ms, NCE of 27, and data
collection in centroid mode. The isolation window for precursor ions
was set to 1.5
m
/
z
. Peptides with
a charge state of 1, 6–8, and unassigned were excluded, and
dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The S-lens RF level was set to
60 with a spray voltage value of 2.60 kV and an ionization chamber
temperature of 300 °C.
LC–MS/MS analysis for HCT116
and HEK293 proteomics samples was performed with an UltiMate 3000
RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Acclaim PepMap
RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm; 2 μm, 100 Å,
Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an in-line Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap
column (75 μm × 2 cm; 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher
Scientific) heated to 45 °C. The LC system was coupled to an
Exploris 480 orbitrap and Nanospray Flex Ion Source with stainless
steel emitter tip (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A was composed
of H
2
O supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase
B was composed of CH
3
CN supplemented with 0.1% formic acid.
The instrument was run at 0.3 μL/min with the following gradient:
2% Buffer B (0–5 min); 2–20% Buffer B (5–155
min); 20–32% Buffer B (155–185 min); 32–95% Buffer
B (185–186 min); 95% Buffer B (186–190 min); 95–2%
Buffer B (190–191 min); and 2% Buffer B (191–200 min).
MS/MS spectra were collected from 0 to 200 min using a data-dependent,
2-s cycle time setting with the following details: full MS scans were
acquired at a resolution of 120,000, scan range of 300–1650
m
/
z
, maximum IT of 40 ms, normalized AGC
target of 300%, and data collection in profile mode. MS2 scans were
performed by HCD fragmentation with a resolution of 60,000, normalized
AGC target of 100%, maximum IT of 120 ms, HCD collision energy 30%,
and data collection in centroid mode. The isolation window for precursor
ions was set to 1.6
m
/
z
. Peptides
with a charge state of 1, 6+, and unassigned were excluded, and dynamic
exclusion was set to 40 s. The RF lens % was set to 40 with a spray
voltage value of 2.0 kV and an ionization chamber temperature of 300
°C.
Data was processed using the Sequest HT search engine
node within
the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software package. Data were searched using
a concatenated target/decoy UniProt database of the human proteome.
Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages
allowed, and peptide length was set to between 6–144. Precursor
mass range was set to 350–6000. Precursor mass tolerance was
set to 15 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Up
to four dynamic modifications were allowed, including probe-labeled
cysteine (+273.1126), heavy lysine (+8.0142), heavy arginine (+10.0083),
oxidized methionine (+15.9949), cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215),
N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106), N-terminal Met-loss (−131.0405),
and N-terminal Met-loss + acetylation (−89.0299). A minimum
of one peptide was required for protein identification, and false
discovery rate was determined using Percolator with FDR rate set at
1%. For localization of modifications, a score of 75% or greater was
required.
Prior to quantification, chromatographic alignment
was performed
with a maximum retention time difference of 10 min allowed and a minimum
signal/noise threshold of five required for feature mapping. SILAC
ratios were determined using precursor-based quantification in a pairwise
manner based on peak area without normalization or scaling using a
maximum ratio of 40. Peptides containing the same site of probe modification
were grouped, and aggregate statistics were calculated at the site
of modification level for each unique site of modification within
a data set. Data presented are representative of four independent
biological experiments, and sites of modification were required to
be quantifiable at least twice across the biological replicates. Sites
for which only singletons were detected and had singletons detected
in both MGO and vehicle-treated samples were discarded as unreliably
quantifiable.
Recombinant Protein IA vs MGO
50
μg/mL recombinant
ACAT1 or GAPDH (human, Sigma Aldrich) in PBS was incubated with the
indicated concentrations of MGO for 2 h at 37 °C followed by
30-min treatment with 50 μM IA-alkyne at RT in the dark. 1 mM
iodoacetamide was added, and the samples were incubated for an additional
30 min in the dark. Click chemistry and imaging with rhodamine azide
was then performed as described above.
For washout experiments,
the ACAT1 was buffer exchanged into fresh PBS following MGO treatment
using an Amicon ultra centrifugal filter unit with 10 kDa cutoff (Millipore),
after which IA-alkyne labeling and rhodamine azide labeling were performed
as described above.
ACAT1 In Vitro Assay
Recombinant
ACAT1 (200 ng/mL in
PBS) or vehicle was incubated with 2 mM MGO or vehicle for 2 h at
37 °C. 10 mM aqueous stocks of coenzyme A trilithium salt (CoA,
Sigma Aldrich) and acetoacetyl coenzyme A (AcAc-CoA, Cayman Chemicals)
were added to 40 mM MgCl
2
in PBS to give 400 μM final
concentration of each substrate. The substrate mixture was allowed
to preequilibrate at 37 °C, then mixed in a 1:1 ratio with the
reaction solutions, and imaged at 303 nm
33
once a minute using a Synergy Neo HTS Microplate Reader (BioTek).
Relative AcAc-CoA consumption for each condition was calculated by
the normalized absolute difference between the 303 nm absorbance in
the ACAT1 containing reactions and the corresponding ACAT1-less control
reactions.
For MS/MS monitoring of Ac-CoA production, aliquots
of the reactions were taken at the indicated time points and mixed
with MeOH in a 4:1 MeOH/sample ratio to quench the enzymatic reaction.
Internal deuterated standards, 1 μL of 10 mM d3-serine, were
added to the extraction solution for sample normalization, the samples
were centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000
g
, and the supernatant
was kept for immediate LC–MS/MS analysis.
GAPDH In Vitro
Assay
Recombinant GAPDH (50 μg/mL
in PBS) was incubated with 2 mM MGO or vehicle for 1 h at 37 °C
and then added 1:1 vol/vol with PBS solution containing NAD+ (Sigma
Aldrich) and
d
/
l
-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP,
Sigma Aldrich) to give a final concentration of 0.4 mM NAD+ and 2
mM GAP. Absorbance was measured at 340 nm once a minute to monitor
NADH production.
Metabolomics of MGO and BBGC Treatment in
Cells
For
profiling of MGO adduct formation in
Figure S3
, two million HeLa cells were plated in 10 cm plates and were allowed
to grow for 24 h before treatment. Cells were treated in 5 mL of RPMI
with 1 mM MGO for 0, 1, 2, 4, or 8 h.
For profiling of polar
metabolite changes in response to MGO or BBGC treatment in
Figures
4
and
S8
, two million HeLa cells were plated in 10
cm plates and were allowed to grow for 24 h before treatment. Cells
were treated in 5 mL of RPMI with 2 mM MGO for 0, 0.5, 1, 2, or 4
h or with 20 μM BBGC for 0, 2, 4, or 8 h.
Cells were collected
by trypsinization, washed once with PBS, and
resuspended in 300 μL of an 80:20 mixture of MeOH/H
2
O. Internal deuterated standards, 1 μL of 10 mM d3-serine,
were added to the extraction solution for sample normalization. The
mixture was sonicated (Fisher Scientific FB-505) for 10 s (30% amplitude,
1 s on, and 1 s off) followed by a 10-min centrifugation at 16,000
g
and 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and dried
using SpeedVac.
LC–MS/MS Analysis of Metabolites
Dried metabolome
samples for MGO adduct analysis were resuspended in 50 μL of
0.1% TFA in H
2
O and clarified by centrifugation at 16,000
g
for 10 min. Extracellular samples were processed similarly
but in a volume of 200 μL. Targeted MS/MS analyses were performed
on an Agilent triple quadrupole LC–MS/MS instrument (Agilent
Technologies 6460 QQQ) set to positive ion mode. The capillary voltage
was set to 4.0 kV. The drying gas temperature was 300 °C, flow
rate = 5 L/min, and nebulizer pressure = 45 psi. The mass spectrometer
was run in MRM mode with delta EMV(+) set to 200. MRM parameters are
listed in extended data table 1. Chromatography was performed with
a Phenomenex Gemini C18 column (50 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm) at a
flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. Mobile phase A was composed of H
2
O supplemented with 0.1% TFA, and mobile phase B was composed of
CH
3
CN supplemented with 0.1% TFA. The instrument was run
at 0.4 mL/min with the following gradient: 0% Buffer B (0–3
min); 0–100% Buffer B (3–10 min); 100% Buffer B (10–11
min); 100–0% Buffer B (11–12 min); and 0% Buffer B (12–15
min). Relative metabolite abundance was quantified by integrated peak
area for the given MRM-transition normalized to that of the internal
standard.
Dried metabolome samples for polar metabolite analysis
were resuspended in 50 μL of 80:20 MeOH/H
2
O and centrifuged
at 16,000 g for 10 min, and the supernatant was kept. Targeted MS/MS
analysis was performed on an Agilent triple quadrupole LC–MS/MS
instrument (Agilent Technologies 6460 QQQ) set to negative ion mode.
The capillary voltage was set to 3.5 kV. The drying gas temperature
was 300 °C, the drying gas flow rate was 5 L/min, and the nebulizer
pressure was 45 psi. The mass spectrometer was run in MRM mode with
delta EMV(−) set to 0. MRM parameters are listed in extended
data table 1. Hydrophilic interaction chromatography was performed
using a Phenomenex Luna-NH
2
column (50 × 4.6 mm, 5
μM). Mobile phase A was composed of CH
3
CN supplemented
with 0.2% NH
4
OH, and mobile phase B was composed of 95/5
H
2
O/CH
3
CN supplemented with 50 mM NH
4
OAc and 0.2% NH
4
OH. The instrument was run at 0.4 mL/min
with the following gradient: 0% Buffer B (0–2 min); 0–100%
Buffer B (2–15 min); 100% Buffer B (15–20 min); 100–0%
Buffer B (20–21 min); and 0% Buffer B (21–23 min). Injection
volume was 15 μL for all samples. Relative metabolite abundance
was quantified by integrating the peak area for the given MRM-transition
and normalizing to that of the internal d3-serine standard. Data presented
are representative of four independent biological experiments each
containing two technical replicates for a given condition. Heat maps
for metabolomics data were generated using Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/).
Seahorse Assays
ECARs were analyzed with a Seahorse
96XF Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience) using the XF Glycolysis Stress
Test Kit (Seahorse Bioscience) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol with slight modification. Briefly, 20,000 HeLa cells per
well were plated on a 96-well Seahorse microplate in RPMI 24 h prior
to the experiment. The medium was replaced 4 h before the experiment
with Seahorse XF Base Medium supplemented with 0, 0.25, or 1 mM MGO.
Cells were then incubated at 37 °C (low CO
2
) for 4
h. The day prior to the experiment, the Seahorse cartridge was hydrated
with water overnight at 37 °C (low CO
2
). Water was
then replaced with calibrating solution (Seahorse Bioscience) 2 h
prior to the experiment followed by loading the cartridge with glucose—PORT
A (10 mM), oligomycin (3 μM)—PORT B, and 2-deoxyglucose
(50 mM)—PORT C. All three additives were dissolved in Seahorse
XF Base Medium supplemented with MGO matched to the concentrations
of MGO added to the cells in the corresponding positions on the 96-well
microplate. Glycolytic parameters were calculated according to manufacturer’s
protocols. ECAR plots presented are representative of three independent
biological experiments each containing six technical replicates per
condition.