Hydrogen exchange studies of
proteins, have since its inception in the 1950s, have become a key
tool for structural biologists.
1
,
2
Hydrogen deuterium exchange
(HDX) is a well-established technique often combined with mass spectrometry
(MS) for studying protein dynamics and interactions in solution.
3
When placed into a solution of deuterium oxide,
amide hydrogens of the peptide backbone of a protein will exchange
with deuterons (in exchange) at a rate primarily determined by the
presence and stability of local hydrogen bonding.
4
The exchange is quenched by reducing the temperature to
0 °C and the pH to 2.5. This combined reduction in temperature
and pH results in a decrease of the exchange rate by more than 5 orders
of magnitude, and subsequent manipulation of the samples is typically
performed under quench conditions to minimize the loss of the deuterium
label (out exchange) from the peptide amide backbone prior to the
measurement of deuterium incorporation.
4
Sample handling steps following the quenching step have grown with
the complexity of the system being investigated and primarily include
digestion by acid-resistant proteases followed by desalting/concentration
with a trap column but can also involve additional steps to facilitate
the protein digestion, such as protein denaturation, chemical or electrochemical
reduction of disulfide bonds, detergent depletion and lipid stripping
from membrane proteins, and deglycosylation of glycosylated proteins.
5
−
13
Today, HDX–MS workflows are dominated by variants of liquid
chromatography (LC)–MS approaches based on a Peltier-cooled
ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) module.
14
Costly commercial platforms for HDX–MS
are abundant in structural biology research, where they offer automated,
online sample handling and analysis by low-temperature UPLC separations.
The main drawbacks of these systems are their cost, and due to the
low temperatures, high backpressures (up to ∼20,000 psi) because
of increased mobile phase viscosity, and reduced separation efficiency
of LC (a result of resistance of mass transfer).
15
,
16
This resistance to mass transfer not only degrades the separation
efficiency of LC but also results in an increased risk of carryover
of injected material from prior injections as the interaction between
peptides and protease, trap, and analytical column stationary phase
becomes more difficult to disrupt. The carryover of material is detrimental
to HDX experiments as retained peptides lose deuterons as they are
exposed to 100% H
2
O solvents, only to then elute during
subsequent separations, confounding the apparent uptake kinetics.
17
,
18
Despite all these drawbacks, LC remains the workhorse of HDX–MS
workflows although there have been a handful of attempts to employ
capillary electrophoresis (CE) in HDX experiments.
CE is a well-established
method for the separation of numerous
classes of molecules and is a valuable method for proteomics research.
19
−
21
CE separates based on the differential mobility of analytes in an
electric field with a velocity dependent on their size and charge
(
eq
1
).
22
In the beginning of the 1990s, CE–MS was used for
tryptic digests of proteins and protein complexes. Since then, CE–MS
has demonstrated 10–100 times better sensitivity than reversed
phase LC–MS for the measurement of peptides and proteoforms
19
,
23
−
25
Recently, researchers in the field of HDX–MS
have been alluding to the potential advantages of using CE for HDX–MS
workflows.
26
−
29
There have been several studies where CE–MS has been used
for HDX experiments but these studies employed deuterated background
electrolyte (BGE) or deuterated sheath-flow additives and, as such,
offer limited application to structural investigations.
30
−
32
Microchip electrophoresis has been utilized for the separation of
several proteins following label, quench, and digestion steps, and
though the separation was performed at ambient temperature, the speed
of the separations allowed for similar deuterium retention to cold
LC separations.
16
One advantage of CE that
could make it suitable for HDX is that, in contrast to LC, the separation
performance is, theoretically, improved at lower temperatures, for
two main reasons:
First, low temperatures result in increased
viscosity (η)
of the BGE,
33
reducing any longitudinal
diffusion of the analytes, as shown in the equation for electrophoretic
mobility μ given by the Einstein relation
1
where
q
is the effective
charge and
r
is the hydrodynamic radius of the analyte.
One trade off of this advantage is the requirement for higher field
strengths to maintain the same CE current as achieved in separations
at room temperature or even warmer conditions.
Second, in CE,
the number of theoretical plates
N
can be defined
as
2
where
V
is the potential
difference driving the separation, μ is the electrophoretic
mobility of the analyte, and
D
is the diffusivity
of the analyte. In turn, the diffusivity of an analyte in a liquid
with a low Reynolds number can be determined from the Stokes–Einstein
equation
3
where
T
is the temperature
and
k
B
is Boltzmann’s constant.
As shown by Ma and Horváth,
33
combining
eqs
1
–
3
gives
4
Hence, the plate number
N
is directly proportional
to the voltage applied in CE and inversely proportional to the temperature
T
. It should be noted that a reduction of temperature from
ambient to 0 °C results in merely ∼10% increase of
N
. While the theoretical improvement is small, CE appears
to suffer less from the low temperatures used to reduce out exchange
in HDX experiments, in comparison to LC, where the backing pressure
during cold separation may approach the limits of what the system
fittings can sustain.
In this seminal study, we present proof
of principal of in-solution
deuterium labeling of peptides and proteins followed by quenching,
digestion, and separation in fused-silica capillaries at subzero-degrees
Celsius temperatures using CE–MS. The platform is cost-efficient
and easy to implement with any MS.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals
Sodium hydroxide (∼3 mm flakes, 97%
Aldrich 48024), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) peptide
standard mix (Sigma H2016-1VL), hemoglobin (Hb) from bovine erythrocytes
(EMD Millipore 374834-10 g), ammonium persulfate (APS) (≥98%
Sigma 248614-5 g), and bradykinin (BK) acetate salt (≥98% Sigma
B3259-5 mg) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Darmstadt, Germany).
Ammonium bicarbonate (99% Acros, 393210010), acetonitrile (ACN) (Optima,
Fisher A955-212), H
2
O (Optima, Fisher W6-4), formic acid
(99+% Pierce 28950), formic acid (Optima, Fisher A117-50), acetic
acid (Fisher A113-10x1AMP), dimethylformamide (≥99.5%, Fisher
D/3846/17), ammonium acetate (Optima, Fisher A114-50), D
2
O (99.8%, Thermo Cat 166300100), urea (99.5%, Acros, 140750010),
pepsin from porcine gastric mucosa (Acros, 417071000), and methanol
(Optima, Fisher A456-4) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (Göteborg,
Sweden).
Capillary Electrophoresis
CE separations were performed,
and gas phase ions generated using a coaxial sheath flow CE–ESI
interface previously described,
34
with
the modifications provided below.
A direct current high voltage
power supply (HVPS; HPS100-40-0.4, Beijing Excellent Innovate HD Electronics
Company, Beijing, China) was manually operated to ramp the voltage
over ∼7 s to 20 kV unless otherwise specified. Stable current
was observed during the separations, and an Ohm’s plot shows
the separations occurred within the linear region of the voltage–current
curve (
Figure S1
). Separations were performed
in the anode to cathode mode using 24 cm long fused silica separation
capillaries with 105 μm outer diameter (OD) and 40 μm
inner diameter (ID) (TSP040105, Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ).
Hydrodynamic sample injections were performed using 5 psi N
2
(g) backing for 3 s for both capillaries used in this study (a pneumatic
system diagram is shown in
Figure S2
).
The electrical circuit was connected to earth ground via the stainless-steel
needle of the sheath liquid syringe. For uncoated bare fused silica
(BFS) separations, the separation capillary was conditioned between
injections for 6 min with 3/1 (v/v) H
2
O/ACN, 10 min with
3/1 (v/v) 0.1 M NaOH/ACN, 10 min with 3/1 (v/v) H
2
O/ACN,
and 10 min with BGE 3/1 (v/v) 1% formic acid (aq)/ACN delivered at
20 psi of N
2
(g) by connecting the separation capillary
inlet to a laboratory built acrylic holder for solution vials using
1/4-28 male to Luer lock assemblies (P-683, Idex Health & Science,
Oak Harbor, WA;
Figures S3–S5
).
For linear polyacrylamide (LPA)-coated capillaries, 10 min of BGE
at 20 psi was used to condition the capillary between sample and standard
injections. The capillary inlet was rinsed with water after NaOH flushing
and sample injection (
Figure S6
).
The LPA capillaries were prepared, as previously described.
35
Note that it is important to use fresh APS for
the coating procedure. One suggestion is to prepare aliquots of 5%
APS upon receipt of APS and store them at −20 °C for future
use.
Electrospray Ionization
A PEEK tee assembly (P-727,
Idex Health & Science, Oak Harbor, WA) was housed in an aluminum
block for thermal regulation and attached to a piece of optical breadboard
fastened to a linear ball screw gantry stage (FSL40XYZ-L, Fuyu Technology,
Chengdu, China;
Figures
1
and
S4
). The stage was controlled by
motion control software (AMC4030, Fuyu Technology, Chengdu, China)
to position the ESI emitter at the mass spectrometer inlet. Stainless-steel
hypodermic tubing (133 μm ID, 261 μm OD) of length 50
mm (Hamilton Company, Reno, Nevada) was used for the ESI emitter assembly.
A 2 kV electrospray voltage was applied directly to the stainless-steel
tubing and controlled using MassLynx software (Waters Corporation,
Manchester, United Kingdom). The sheath liquid flow rate was 500 nL/min
using a solution comprising 50% MeOH, 0.1% formic acid, and 50 nM
leu-enk. The electrospray was visually monitored with a Dino-Lite
long working distance microscope (AM4113TL, ANMO Electronics Corporation,
New Taipei City, Taiwan).
Figure 1
Layout of the Peltier-cooled CE housing attached
to a sample pod
for injection. (A) Gas-tight acrylic pod containing a small volume
insert for hydrodynamic sample injection. (B) Half of the aluminum
housing to which the Peltier element is attached. (C) Separation capillary
inlet assembly. (D) Coaxial sheath flow nano-electrospray emitter.
Thermal Regulation
A Peltier cooling module (APHC-12704-S,
European Thermodynamics Limited, Leicestershire, United Kingdom) was
mounted to the surface of an in-house designed (Autodesk Fusion, Autodesk,
San Rafael, CA) and machined (DMU 70, DMG MORI, Nagoya, Japan) aluminum
block holding the ESI emitter. A liquid CPU cooler (Hydro Series H150i
Pro RGB 360 mm, Corsair, Fremont, CA) operated in extreme mode with
Corsair iCUE software was fastened to a small aluminum heat spreader
on the hot side of the Peltier cooling module to facilitate heat exchange
(
Figure S7
, the CPU cooler is seen attached
in panel B). The Peltier cooling module was controlled using a small
OEM precision Peltier temperature controller (TEC-1091, Meerstetter
Engineering, Rubigen, Switzerland) coupled with TEC Service software
(Meerstetter Engineering, Rubigen, Switzerland).
Mass Spectrometry
Generated ions were analyzed on a
Synapt G2–Si (Waters Corporation, Manchester, United Kingdom)
operated in positive ion mode with a mass range of 50–1200
Da in resolution mode using a desolvation temperature of 22 °C
and 250 mL/min N
2
(g) cone gas flow rate. The instrument
was calibrated on the day of use using an appropriate dilution of
sodium iodide (18600791-3, Waters Corporation, Manchester, United
Kingdom) in 50% MeOH and 0.1% formic acid delivered to the electrospray
emitter at 500 nL/min through the sheath liquid capillary. Unlabeled
peptides were analyzed in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode
using the UDMS
E
method with instrument settings previously
reported for this instrument, unless otherwise stated.
36
,
37
Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Sample Preparation and Workflow
For HDX–MS, stock solutions of either 2 mg/mL HPLC peptide
standard, 4.4 mM ATII with 4.4 mM BK or 120 mg/mL intact bovine Hb
were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in H
2
O, pH
6.79. An aliquot (13.75 μL) was diluted 20-fold in either 50
mM ammonium bicarbonate in H
2
O (pH 6.79; undeuterated control),
50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in D
2
O (pH
read
6.27),
or 6 M urea in D
2
O (pH
read
3.04; maximally deuterated
control). The peptide standards were incubated overnight and quenched
by 20-fold dilution into ice cold 0.24% formic acid in 1/4 (v/v) ACN/H
2
O, which lowered the solution pH
read
to 2.85. The
intact Hb was exposed to the deuterated buffer for five timepoints
(5, 50, 500, 5000, and 50,000 s). The temperature was maintained at
22 °C in an Eppendorf Thermomixer Compact (Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany) for the three longest timepoints, and the deuteration reaction
was quenched by preparing a 20-fold dilution of an aliquot of the
labeled protein in ice cold 3.5 mg/mL pepsin with 1% formic acid in
H
2
O, which lowered the solution pH
read
to 2.31.
A pulse-label control was prepared by incubating an aliquot of the
stock Hb standard for 50,000 s in the thermomixer and then performing
a 5 s labeling step, as described above. The protein/pepsin mixture
was vortexed for ∼5 s and an aliquot placed in a PCR tube containing
ice cold ACN, such that the final concentration of ACN was 25% (v/v).
The PCR tube was removed from the ice and placed in a laboratory-designed,
in-house machined acrylic sample pod featuring an o ring for a gas-tight
seal and connected to a N
2
(g) in-house line (
Figure S7
). The assembled sample pod was connected
to the separation capillary inlet by passing the separation capillary
inlet (
Figure S8
) through a union assembly
with a tubing sleeve through a single ferrule (P-720; F-180; F-120,
Idex Health & Science, Oak Harbor, WA) at the inlet side, and
a sample plug was injected at 5 psi for 3 s. A 16 mm length of 2 mm
OD, 1 mm ID PEEK tubing (6330N11, McMaster-Carr, Elmhurst, IL, USA)
was secured with epoxy (36-2421, Biltema, Gothenburg, Sweden) to the
junction of the tubing sleeve and the F-120 ferrule to provide a gas-tight
fitting to the acrylic sample and BGE pod using a 2 mm push-in fitting
(QSM-M5-2, Festo, Esslingen, Germany). When the pods are attached
to the device, 1–2 mm of the capillary inlet will be submerged
in the solution in the pods, and upon introduction of N
2
(g) into the pods, solution will be forced into the capillary. After
injection, the sample pod was removed, the capillary inlet rinsed
with water (
Figure S6
) and replaced with
another acrylic pod containing BGE in a stainless-steel vial connected
to both N
2
(g) and the HVPS (
Figures S3–S5
). A plug of BGE (20 psi, 3 s) was injected into
the capillary to push the sample plug into the thermostatic region
of the capillary. After the plug injection, the HVPS was ramped, and
acquisition was started.
Data Evaluation
Peptic peptides were sequenced with
PLGS 3.0.3 (Waters Corporation, Manchester, United Kingdom), as previously
described,
36
,
37
with a modification of setting
enzymes to “non-specific.” CE–MS data obtained
with UDMS
E
were searched against a database of UNIPROT
peptide sequence entries for HBA_BOVIN, HBB_BOVIN, and PEPA_PIG. Complete
data were further processed with the HX-DEAL module in Mass Spec Studio
for HDX-analysis.
38
Tables S1–S5
show summaries of the experiments according
to the Gothenburg format.
Results and Discussion
After machining and assembly
of the cooled fused-silica capillary
platform (
Figure
1
),
we assessed its performance and compared it with a previously published
report on a microchip electrophoresis device.
16
Here, we first present benchmarks of the CE platform with a focus
on peak capacities for several separation conditions as well as the
analysis of peptide standards for HDX to demonstrate acceptable deuterium
back exchange. We then present the results of a bottom-up analysis
of bovine Hb for five timepoints and two different separation conditions.
Peak Capacity
Peak capacity is an important factor
in maximizing the utility of generated data in HDX experiments. Peak
capacity (
n
c
) is defined as “the
maximum number of peaks... [that can] be separated on a given column.”
39
It is an entity that is dependent on the separation
efficiency in both CE and LC. In CE, the capillaries have no packing,
and thus, plate counts are not subject to Eddy diffusion as in LC.
Hence, there is no mass transfer as the separation is based on the
analyte’s behavior in an electric field. This leaves the common
factor of diffusivity as the single major source of band broadening
in CE separations. Recently, several
n
c
calculations appropriate for use with microchip electrophoresis
and CE have been derived.
39
In our
analysis of
n
c
achieved by cold CE separations,
we used the following equation describing the upper limit peak capacity
5
where
R
s
is the
resolution,
L
d
is the migration distance,
D
is the analyte’s diffusion coefficient, and
t
a
and
t
z
are the
migration times of the first and last peaks of interest, respectively.
Because the peak width in CE is migration time-dependent and nonlinear,
increasing by the 3/2-power of migration time, in contrast to an assumed
constant peak width in gradient chromatography, we believe that the
n
c
values for our CE separations are more appropriate
than those reported using the traditional 4σ method common in
LC. Supporting Information
Table S6
shows
calculated
n
c
for several different BGEs
investigated at two different temperatures and field strengths for
separations of labeled quenched peptide standards, including angiotensin
II (ATII, analyte A in
eq
5
) and met-enkephalin (ME, analyte Z in
eq
5
). The initial separation of standards, as
well as triplicate measures of deuterated, quenched, digested or intact
Hb, on the LPA-coated capillary was performed using a 60 s voltage
ramp by remotely controlling the HVPS with a digital potentiometer
operated by an Arduino device. Only the −5 °C samples
on LPA capillaries were automatically ramped. We found that optimal
peak capacities were obtained at 0 °C with a BGE consisting of
1% FA, 25% ACN for BFS capillaries, and 10% HAc for LPA capillaries.
The values of
n
c
for these conditions
averaged 72 on BFS and 107 on LPA capillaries when calculated using
the first (ATII) and last (ME) migrating standard peptides. When we
subsequently measured peptic digests of Hb under these two conditions,
the
n
c
averaged 120 on BFS and 175 on
LPA capillaries. Thus,
n
c
for the LPA
capillary exceeded that of the BFS capillary by almost 50%. The differences
between the BFS and LPA capillaries are not surprising as the LPA
coating has been used in electrophoresis since 1985 to eliminate solute
adsorption and electroosmotic flow.
40
In
addition to the increased peak capacity of the LPA capillaries, the
sequence coverage of Hb is increased due to the disruption of adsorption
of hydrophilic peptides to the silanol groups of the capillary wall.
The Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity indices of all identified
peptides present in the final Hb data set have been mapped in a hydrophobicity
histogram (
Figure S9
), and a clear trend
of increased coverage of hydrophilic peptides is seen for the LPA
capillaries.
41
This is well in line with
previous findings that more hydrophilic peptides are detected with
CE versus reverse phase LC.
42
We chose
to use 40 μm ID capillaries as we have done so in our previous
work.
34
,
43
The use of larger ID capillaries at subzero
temperatures has been reported to be feasible and with the result
that more sample can be injected in a shorter plug length versus smaller
lumen capillaries while attenuating the band broadening that typically
accompanies sample injection on larger lumen capillaries.
33
In comparison to the peak capacity values
reported previously in
a study involving both microchip electrophoresis (23 cm separation
channel) and LC for HDX separations,
16
we
have obtained values that are placed inside of this range (
Table
1
). While it is difficult
to make a high-quality comparison of the deuterium retention of our
platform versus microchip CE, since we do not have access to the other
study’s raw data and their demonstrations of deuterium uptake
are displayed using only up to ∼50% of the
y
-axis of the plots (making precise visual readouts very difficult),
we were able to compare the peak capacity of 0 °C CE to 0 °C
LC and ambient microchip CE (
Table
1
). While our estimated upper peak capacity is less
than that for the microchip electrophoresis method, our sequence coverage
is higher. In comparison to the results obtained in the microchip
electrophoresis study,
16
our UDMS
E
identifications found three of the six peptides reported in that
paper. A very recent report using higher than normal LC flow rates
has reported achieving peak capacities of 59.6 in a 10 min gradient
using 200 μL/min flow rates,
15
and
while this is an improvement over the LC separation reported in
Table
1
, it is still below
the capacity attainable on CE tested in this study and elsewhere.
16
Table 1
Separation Characteristics for Bare
Fused-Silica and Linear Polyacrylamide-Coated Capillaries Compared
to LC and Microchip Electrophoresis Used for HDX–MS, Values
Given as Coverage % (Redundancy)
a
coverage % (redundancy)
method
separation
time (min)
peak capacity@
r
= 1
b
injected
amount (fmol)
HBA
HBB
no. of HVPS
ESI flow
rate (μL min
–1
)
0 °C LC
16
7
31
50,000
97.9 (6.62)
92.4 (5.20)
0
100.00
ambient microchip electrophoresis
16
1
351
5
48.2 (3.29)
84.8 (1.29)
5
0.63
0 °C CE (BFS)
3.5
120
50
75.4 (2.15)
79.3 (2.03)
1
0.50
0 °C CE (LPA)
8
175
50
99.3 (3.34)
95.9 (3.85)
1
0.50
a
Abbreviations: BFS, bare fused silica;
LPA, linear polyacrylamide; and HVPS, high voltage power supplies.
b
Estimated with
eq
5
for electrophoretic separations.
Values for
LC are given as previously reported estimates using the 4σ method.
Back Exchange and Carryover
The most frequently used
peptide standards in HDX–MS, bradykinin (BK) and ATII, comigrated
on a BFS capillary with the BGE used in this study; therefore, we
also performed analysis of a HPLC peptide standard mix. A crucial
consideration in HDX experiments is the back exchange (BE) of deuterons
under quench conditions and during the separation step. BE was calculated
according to
eq
6
6
where
D
max
is
the deuterium content of the peptide standards,
N
D
is the number of labile backbone amide hydrogens of
the peptides (calculated as the number of amino acids minus the number
of prolines minus 1), and
D
frac
is the
fraction of deuterium in the labeling buffer.
The peptide standards
were also assessed for BE, and the results for BFS and LPA capillaries
at 0 °C and using 20 kV as separation potential are listed in
Table
2
. After the first
separation, where BE was absent, a fresh standard was prepared, labeled,
quenched, and analyzed to confirm the validity of the original result.
The result was replicated with the newly prepared standard. Because
BK comigrates with ATII on BFS capillaries under the conditions investigated,
it was not as thoroughly assessed as ATII or ME. BE values of 20%
on BFS and 34% on LPA capillaries were achieved for ATII. The value
of BE for ATII on LPA capillaries was similar to previously reported
values from commercial and laboratory-modified UPLC platforms (28–36%),
while on BFS capillaries, it approached BE levels achieved by direct
infusion of a fully deuterated standard.
44
,
45
Table 2
Deuterium Back Exchange Values for
Standard Peptides Assessed with CE–MS at 0 °C and 20 kV,
Values Given as Mean (% RSD),
n
= 3
a
capillary
coating
BGE
pH
b
peptide
deuteron
uptake
back exchange
(%)
BFS
1% FA, 25% ACN
2.23
ATII
4.55 (0.65)
20
(2.6)
LPA
10% HAc
2.17
3.76 (0.97)
34
(1.9)
BFS
1% FA, 25% ACN
2.23
BK
3.76 (0.27)
21 (1.0)
LPA
10% HAc
2.17
BFS
1% FA, 25% ACN
2.23
ME
4.74 (1.7)
0
LPA
10% HAc
2.17
1.2 (27)
68 (13)
a
Abbreviations: ACN, acetonitrile;
ATII, angiotensin II; BGE, background electrolyte; BFS, bare fused
silica; BK, bradykinin; FA, formic acid; HAc, acetic acid; LPA, linear
polyacrylamide; and ME, Met-enkephalin.
b
Measured at 20 °C.
While ME is not traditionally used to assess BE in
HDX–MS
experiments, it seemed appropriate to include it in the analysis because
it was the slowest migrating peptide in the HPLC peptide standard,
as well as the most hydrophobic peptide in the mixture. Three other
peptides in the standard mixture were not assessed for BE: gly–tyr,
and val–tyr–val as they were much shorter than any typical
peptide used for structural analysis; leu-enk was not assessed as
it was present in the sheath liquid for use as lock mass correction.
While the chosen BGE composition was based on the minimum BE achieved
for peptide standards, this does not necessarily mean the BGEs were
the best choice for achieving maximum sequence coverage or peak capacity.
During development, much time was spent on analyzing the DMF-containing
BGE and BFS capillaries as these were able to separate and detect
10 of 11 peptides from an HPLC peptide retention time marker standard
mixture. Although the aprotic-modified BGEs showed promise for peptide
mapping,
46
further work is needed to assess
the viability of such an approach with the short capillaries and low
temperatures used in our HDX workflow. Improved sensitivity and thus
sequence coverage can also be obtained for CE-based proteomics platforms,
as demonstrated by trace-sensitive analyses by the Nemes group, achieving
amol to zmol sensitivity for peptides.
47
,
48
Assessing
deuterium BE required the manual inspection of summed
mass spectra to obtain deuteron uptake values. Spectral signal from
peptides which have been retained in the system become problematic
because as they sit in the protonated solvent of the separation modality,
deuterons will exchange before the material ultimately reaches the
detector. There has been much effort to address this phenomenon in
the HDX community.
17
,
18
During data analysis, we have
not observed any signs of carryover in the inspected mass spectra
following injections of standard peptides, intact Hb, or peptic digests
of Hb. Sample carryover was assessed by extracting ion electropherograms
for the 18 most abundant identified peptic peptides of Hb from standard
peptide separations injected after peptic digests of Hb. The two most
hydrophobic and the two most hydrophilic Hb peptides according to
their Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity indices were also searched
for as carryover in the following separations. The use of a peptide
standard containing two or five peptides in the assessment of carryover
is justified due to the fact that a failed injection can result in
not seeing any signal from the analytes being injected, and therefore,
the analysis of a successful blank injection could be indistinguishable
from a failed blank injection. Observing peaks from the peptide standards
demonstrates via peak shape and migration time, that the injection
was successful and the capillary is performing normally. Since in
CE we would only expect carryover from residual material on the outside
of the capillary, ensuring that the capillary inlet has been immersed
into the sample gives us the highest probability of observing carryover.
An example of the lack of observable carryover in an HPLC peptide
standard separation following a standard capillary conditioning step
(10 min 20 psi flushing with 10% HAc BGE) after the injection of the
peptic digests of a quenched 5 s labeling timepoint is shown in
Table S7
. For the assessment of carryover, the
undeuterated peptide ion base peak
m
/
z
was extracted as an EIE ± 0.02 Da, as well as the
m
/
z
for every isotopologue expected between the base
peak of the deuterated peptide ion and the base peak of the undeuterated
peptide ion. We searched data for carryover in such a manner on both
BFS and LPA capillaries operated at −5, 0, 2 °C, and ambient
temperature for separations using 5% HAc; 10% HAc; 20% DMF, 20% HAc;
10% DMF, 10% ACN, 20% HAc; and 25% ACN, 1% FA. Carryover from HPLC
peptide standards (
n
= 14); a standard of ATII &
BK (
n
= 7); intact Hb (
n
= 1); and
peptic digests of Hb (
n
= 9) was searched for in
the data file from the immediately following separation after one
sequence of capillary conditioning. Additionally, during curation
of the Hb data sets, more than 1400 spectra were inspected during
workup in Mass Spec Studio. We found no legitimate instances of carryover
in these data.
This finding is not surprising based on the low
amount of sample
injected into the capillary versus the amount of sample used for LC
(tens of fmol vs tens of pmol), and it has been suggested previously
that CE separations have the potential to overcome the issue of carryover.
28
Between sample injections, the replenishing
of BGE by flushing multiple capillary volumes of fresh BGE for LPA
capillaries and the extended NaOH surface cleaning for BFS capillaries
appears sufficient to prevent any carryover signal from being observed.
Bovine Hemoglobin
After selecting the best BGE composition
for each of the capillary surfaces, deuterium labeling at five timepoints
was carried out.
Table
3
shows peptic peptides identified by UDMS
E
analysis and
used for the full HDX time course, whereas
Table
4
shows the peak width and migration time
reproducibility for the different separation conditions for six peptides
chosen based on their Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity indices.
Figure
2
shows their corresponding
electropherograms and deuterium uptake. In some cases, for the sake
of providing an uncluttered graphical representation, the ion from
the extracted ion electropherogram is not the base peak ion for that
peptide due to an isobaric ion showing up in the trace at a different
migration time. It was observed that peak shapes were more symmetric,
and the signal intensity was around an order of magnitude higher for
the peptides separated on LPA capillaries than that on BFS capillaries.
Although LPA-coated capillaries provided an overall lower deuterium
retention in terms of absolute values when compared to BFS capillaries
(
Table
2
and
Figure
2
), we did not detect
any differences in the deuterium uptake rates (
Figure S10
).
Figure 2
Intensity-normalized extracted ion electropherograms demonstrate
differences in migration times between BFS and LPA capillaries and
deuterium uptake plots for six representative peptides from peptic
digests of labeled Hb. The orange trace shows the results from separations
using a BFS capillary, and the purple trace shows the results from
separations using an LPA-coated capillary. Annotation of the peptide
sequence and their corresponding Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity
index are provided on the right borders of each panel row. (Left)
Representative peak shapes and migration times are shown at the 500
s labeling timepoint. (Right) Deuterium uptake was found to be more
retained with bare-fused silica capillaries. Error bars represent
one standard deviation,
n
= 3 per timepoint. However,
some peptides were only present in sufficient abundance across all
incubation times with the LPA coating, as shown by the absence of
the orange trace for BFS capillaries in two of the six panels above.
α136–141 is shown at the 500 s timepoint for this particular
sample separated on a BFS capillary, but it was not of sufficient
quality at later timepoints and was omitted from the final data set,
and as a result, the deuterium uptake plots do not include this peptide.
β35–40 was not detected at all and could not be included
in deuterium uptake plots.
Table 3
Protein Coverage of Peptic Peptides
of Hemoglobin Suitable for HDX Analysis with CE–MS
a
capillary
coating
BGE
pH
b
protein
% coverage
no. of peptides
average peptide
length (#AA)
redundancy
BFS
1% FA,25% ACN
2.23
α-Hb
75.4
13
24
2.15
β-Hb
79.3
17
18
2.03
LPA
10% HAc
2.17
α-Hb
99.3
22
23
3.34
β-Hb
95.9
30
19
3.85
a
Abbreviations: ACN, acetonitrile;
BGE, background electrolyte; BFS, bare fused silica; FA, formic acid;
HAc, acetic acid; and LPA, linear polyacrylamide.
b
Measured at 20 °C.
Table 4
Separation Performance for Six Representative
Hb Peptic Peptides Measured across All HDX Timepoints on BFS (
n
= 15 Injections) and LPA (
n
= 15 Injections)
Capillaries, Values Given as Mean (% RSD)
a
peptide
hydrophobicity
b
capillary coating
migration time (s)
FWHM (s)
α 41–66
0.008
BFS
148 (3.8)
11.4 (29)
LPA
250 (2.5)
9 (22)
α 99–106
0.813
BFS
137 (4.5)
6.9 (20)
LPA
212 (2.1)
6.7 (15)
α 136–141
–1.23
BFS
N/A
N/A
LPA
207 (2)
8.3 (24)
β 35–40
–1.40
BFS
N/A
N/A
LPA
384 (3.4)
13.5 (23)
β 102–109
1.33
BFS
177 (6.5)
8.9 (18)
LPA
321 (3.1)
11 (22)
β 128–145
–0.033
BFS
139 (4.6)
7.3 (28)
LPA
222 (2.1)
7.8 (22)
a
Abbreviations: BFS, bare fused silica;
and LPA, linear polyacrylamide.
b
Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity
index.
The higher migration time RSDs observed for the BFS
capillaries
are likely due in part to the fact that collecting the triplicate
timepoint measurements on BFS capillaries spanned more than three
weeks and required multiple capillary replacements. The two most polar
peptides in the list, α 136–141 and β 35–40,
were detected in the BFS separations, but by the 500 s labeling timepoint,
the signals were unusable. Since the migration times and peak widths
were initially recorded during manual curation of these six peptides
for the purpose of reporting D uptake (
Figure
2
), further monitoring of these two ions on
BFS capillaries was halted.
Although BFS capillaries offered
faster migration times, the analysis
took longer than when using LPA capillaries because the BFS capillaries
required more rinsing steps between sample injections. An additional
consideration was residual NaOH left on the emitter after conditioning
the BFS capillaries. Adding a tip-rinsing station to the platform,
such as that used by the Sciex Digital Picoview nanospray ion source,
would improve the robustness of this workflow. In contrast to the
work on BFS that spanned a long time, measurement of the complete
HDX time course on LPA was performed within an intense 21 h time period
using a single capillary. While the separation reproducibility was
notably better on the LPA capillary, it should be emphasized that
these measurements were performed with manual voltage ramping. Incorporation
of automated voltage ramping along with instrument triggering will
likely result in better migration time reproducibility. Also, migration
time alignment could be an option for these data sets to enable time
savings during data curation. While the separations in this study
were carried out on rather short capillaries, for complex mixtures
and/or larger proteins where more resolving power is needed from the
separation, the benefits of a longer capillary for increasing sequence
coverage may be of added benefit. Furthermore, while it is uncommon
that a sample may be available at 120 mg/mL concentration, we chose
this concentration in line with the previous report for microchip
electrophoresis.
16
However, here we are
performing a 400-fold dilution of the sample prior to injection while
still injecting only ∼50 fmol of protein digest. This is ∼3
orders of magnitude less material than typical recent HDX workflows
(10–50 pmol).
44
,
48
−
51
Although Hb is a well-studied
protein due to its importance for
the uptake of oxygen in the blood, we wanted to investigate how well
our HDX CE–MS platform performed in terms of mapping structurally
relevant information. Additionally, it is suggested to benchmark new
HDX platforms using standard proteins such as bovine Hb.
52
We compared the relative uptake of deuterium
in Hb under native conditions with that after subjecting a sample
of Hb to denaturing conditions with 6 M urea (
Tables S1–S5, Figures S9 and S10
).
Figure
3
shows the relative protection
of the different regions of the Hb tetramer. We noted that sites that
were more protected from HDX in the native state coincided with the
interaction sites for the Hb subunits.
53
Specifically, the residues R32–Y43 and L92–D127 on
α-Hb and R29–E42 and D98–Q130 on β-Hb coincide
with where these two monomers bind to each other. Our data showed
decreased susceptibility for HDX for the native state of Hb compared
to the urea-exposed state in those regions (
Figures
3
and
S11
) We consider
this finding to validate our method as a promising tool for structural
proteomics, enabling characterization of molecular binding and conformational
dynamics, such as those encountered in protein–ligand interactions.
Figure 3
Overlay
of HDX data for Hb on the PDB structure
1FSX
. Hb labeled with
D
2
O under native conditions was compared to that labeled
after denaturation with 6 M urea. The color scale indicates the ratio
of D uptake for native vs urea after 50,000 s of deuterium incorporation.
Conclusions
We have provided proof of concept for low-temperature
CE–MS
applied to in-solution labeling HDX. Although BFS capillaries provide
fast peptide separations and minimal loss of deuterium from labeled
peptides, our findings show that LPA-coated capillaries are superior
for HDX CE–MS. This rationale is based on the ability of LPA-coated
capillaries to offer excellent peak capacity and largely improved
sequence coverage while requiring less instrument time and agreeing
with BFS experimental uptake rates. LPA capillaries are routinely
used for intact protein analysis and also lend support for the application
of low-temperature CE–MS for intact proteins to be fragmented
by electron-capture dissociation or electron-transfer dissociation.
Due to the nature of electrophoretic separations, we do not observe
carryover. This happens due to the standard procedures for replenishing
BGE by flushing the capillary with multiple volumes of BGE (or other
solvents) between sample injections and because of the simplicity
of flow path components. The beneficial lack of carryover with our
system stands in stark contrast to LC-based HDX platforms, which require
thorough assessment and time spent mitigating carryover. There remain
many avenues to pursue for further optimization of this platform,
including, but not limited to, BGE optimization (pH, organic content,
and concentration), a concentrating/desalting step, immobilized/embedded
protease digestion, upgrading the Peltier element to allow even colder
separations, incorporating a sheathless electrospray interface, alternate
capillary coatings, and assessing longer or shorter capillaries. Additional
investigations into the tolerance of the separation for salts and
solutes common in protein chemistry will also be a focus of future
optimization. Several compounds such as the reducing agent tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
and anionic lipids or detergents which prove detrimental to LC separations
should migrate away from the mass spectrometer under the electrophoretic
conditions employed here, and their impact on the CE separations will
occur in future optimizations.