Introduction
Networks
are a powerful abstraction of biological systems and are
useful for modeling and visualizing the complex interplay of the many
proteins that make up a cell. Within the field of proteomics, pull-down
experiments can be used to produce protein interaction networks, and
the results from quantitative proteomics studies are commonly visualized
using precomputed networks from databases such as STRING.
1
Cytoscape
2
is a widely
used platform that is well suited for analysis and visualization of
such networks; however, there was previously no straightforward way
to import networks from STRING into Cytoscape. The stringApp
3
solves this by providing easy access to STRING
networks within Cytoscape while retaining their distinctive look and
much of their functionality.
Whether interpreting the results
from omics studies or otherwise
trying to understand any biological process or disease, it is important
to consider the complex interactions between all the molecular players
involved. The STRING database captures this in the form of a functional
association network that integrates evidence from multiple sources,
including known protein complexes and pathways, automatic text mining
of the literature, experimental data, protein coexpression, phylogenetic
profiles, and genomic context. The reliability of each association
is summarized as a confidence score, which translates to, given the
underlying evidence, how sure we can be that two proteins are involved
in the same biological process. In addition to the full functional
association network, recent versions of STRING provide a physical
subnetwork, consisting only of physical protein–protein interactions
with confidence scores reflecting the probability of the linked proteins
being part of the same protein complex. For convenience, we will in
this paper use the word
interactions
to refer to
both functional associations and physical interactions.
To make
sense of the networks available from databases like STRING,
good tools for analysis and visualization are critical. Cytoscape
is one such tool. Through its graphical user interface (GUI), users
can import protein networks and augment them with data from disparate
sources (e.g., proteomics data), analyze them, and visualize protein-centric
data on protein networks in many different ways. Cytoscape also has
an App Store with hundreds of apps that extend the core functionality
with, for example, additional algorithms for network layout and clustering.
4
One such app is the stringApp, which extends
Cytoscape with several
types of queries for retrieving networks from STRING, a visual style
for the networks similar to that of the STRING web interface, enrichment
analysis, and more. The target user group is researchers and scientists,
who focus on the biological interpretation of low- and high-throughput
data, usually generated by themselves or retrieved from publicly available
resources, as well as the generation of different hypotheses based
on these data and its analysis.
5
−
11
Therefore, in the first stringApp paper, we focused on how the app
can be used to visualize data from omics experiments, in particular
from quantitative proteomics, on STRING networks.
3
Here, we present the new stringApp 2.0, focusing
on features that
are either new or were not covered in the original publication. Several
of these focus on making stringApp better suited for working with
heterogeneous networks: a new query type that allows retrieval of
cross-species networks, functionality to expand networks with interacting
proteins from the same or another species, and the ability to convert
any Cytoscape network to a STRING-like network, thereby gaining access
to most stringApp features. Enrichment analysis has also been greatly
improved: functional enrichment can now be automatically retrieved
for all groups/clusters of proteins in a network, the results include
three times as many categories of terms as previously described, and
enriched terms can be added as nodes in the network. The latest stringApp
version supports the retrieval of physical interactions as well as
functional associations, and it is possible to change a network between
the two types. Last but not least, we have made major improvements
to the GUI, including a new results panel. We highlight many of the
new stringApp features in two use cases that both deal with heterogeneous
networks, namely a SARS-CoV-2 interaction map released recently
12
and a malaria network (including the human host,
the parasite
Plasmodium falciparum
,
and its vector
Anopheles gambiae
) based
on the cross-species interaction data now available in stringApp.
Methods
Server-Side
Implementation
Cytoscape stringApp retrieves
the data from several relational databases, which make it available
via web-service application programming interfaces (APIs). The most
important is the STRING database,
1
which
contains over 20 billion intraspecies interactions between 67.6 million
proteins from 14,094 species. In particular, stringApp uses the STRING
API to map identifiers provided by the user to the corresponding STRING
protein identifiers and to retrieve functional enrichment.
Besides
the protein interactions from STRING, stringApp also provides protein–chemical
and chemical–chemical interactions from the STITCH database
13
as well as cross-species virus–host protein–protein
interactions from the Viruses.STRING database.
14
In addition, stringApp also queries DISEASES
15
and PubMed to retrieve sets of genes related
to a disease or topic of interest, respectively.
3
Furthermore, each protein or compound is accompanied by
additional information, including the subcellular localization data
from COMPARTMENTS,
16
the tissue expression
data from TISSUES,
17
and the drug target
classification from Pharos/TCRD
18
whenever
available.
To speed up retrieval of large networks and to support
additional
types of queries, we store the combined network in a dedicated database,
which is accessible via an API. Specifically, we designed this database
to support efficient network expansion as well as retrieval of heterogeneous
networks, such as cross-species interactions. Two versions of the
database exist, one with the full network of functional associations
and another with the subnetwork of physical interactions only.
Host–Parasite
Networks
A list of 1,239 host–parasite
species pairs was defined based on literature searches, expert knowledge,
and public databases (FUNGuild
19
and GloBI
20
). Only eukaryotic nonplant species already part
of STRING were considered as hosts, primarily with a focus on human
and other mammals. Parasites were restricted to protozoa, arthropoda,
worms, and fungi, and also parasite vectors were included (e.g.,
Anopheles
mosquitoes as vectors of malaria parasites
that belong to the genus
Plasmodium
).
Functional and physical host–parasite protein pairs
were identified using text mining and experimental evidence, largely
as described previously for STRING intraspecies pairs.
1
However, while the confidence scores of STRING functional
associations are calculated by benchmarking protein pairs against
the KEGG pathway database
21
(and against
Complex Portal
22
for physical interactions),
such a comprehensive gold standard resource is missing for host–parasite
protein interactions. To circumvent this issue, we estimated interspecies
confidence scores from intraspecies STRING scores,
23
assuming that how well experimental methods work and how
protein relationships are reported in the literature does not differ
fundamentally for proteins from the same or different species.
Following the assumption that protein interactions are preserved
between orthologous protein pairs,
14
,
23
the confidence
scores of host–parasite protein pairs were transferred to orthologous
proteins in other host–parasite pairs. Orthologous proteins
were determined by a reciprocal best hit approach based on Smith–Waterman
sequence alignments and self-normalized bit scores obtained from the
SIMAP database.
24
Evidence was transferred
within genera for parasites (e.g.,
Plasmodium
) and up to class taxonomic level for hosts (e.g., Mammalia), penalizing
the scores based on sequence similarity. To obtain the final functional
and physical confidence scores for each protein pair, direct and transferred
evidence from both experiments and text mining was aggregated as described
previously for STRING.
23
The full pipeline
for orthology transfer of host–parasite interactions is available
on GitHub (
https://github.com/HenriettaHolze/parasite-string-pipeline
).
Client-Side Implementation and Queries
The app itself
is implemented in Java using the Cytoscape 3.9 API. The latest version
is available on the Cytoscape app store under
https://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/stringApp
and the source code is publicly available on GitHub
https://github.com/RBVI/stringApp
under the 2-Clause BSD License.
stringApp 2.0 provides five
different queries for creating STRING networks in Cytoscape, and four
of them have been previously described.
3
The
STRING
:
protein query
and
STITCH: compound query
accept as input one or several protein
or compound identifiers, map those to STRING/STITCH identifiers, and
retrieve the protein–protein or protein–chemical interactions
between them from STRING or STITCH, respectively. The
STRING:
diseases query
and
STRING: PubMed query
are
executed in two steps. First the user enters a disease or topic of
interest, for which stringApp retrieves the top-N proteins related
to it, and second the app fetches the interactions between these proteins
available in the STRING database.
The new type of query in version
2.0 is a
STRING: cross-species
query
. As input it takes the scientific names of two species
of interest, for which we have at least one cross-species protein–protein
interaction with the default confidence score of 0.4. The resulting
network consists of the cross-species interactions at the chosen cutoff
as well as any intraspecies interactions among the same proteins.
stringApp also adds a dedicated visual style with a node color mapping
that allows visualization of up to six different species within a
network.
For all five query types there is a new option, which
allows users
to choose the type of network:
full STRING network
and
physical subnetwork
. The confidence cutoff
and network type chosen as input are saved in the
Network
table
. STRING networks can be converted from one type to
the other using the menu
Change confidence or type
or the
Edge
tab in the
STRING Results
panel. Changing the network type causes the stringApp to delete
all existing edges and to retrieve new edges of the chosen type for
all proteins in the network. Changing the confidence will result in
a new network query only if the cutoff is lowered. If the confidence
cutoff is increased, stringApp will delete all edges with a confidence
lower than the new user-defined one.
Another new feature is
that stringApp can convert Cytoscape networks
that do not originate from STRING into STRING-like networks using
the option
STRINGify network
. The only input parameters
needed from the user are a column that contains protein identifiers
or names mapped by STRING and the species they belong to. The original
edges are lifted over to the mapped nodes, and no additional edges
are retrieved from STRING. Technically, this is accomplished by setting
the network confidence cutoff to 1.0. This means that edges from STRING
can subsequently be added by lowering the cutoff to the default value
of 0.4 or another user-specified value. All node and edge attributes
from the original network are copied to the new network. By default,
unmappable nodes, those without an identifier recognized by STRING
for the given species, are kept in the network and their node names
are transferred to the new network.
All networks created with
stringApp have the
STRING look-and-feel
, which is
accomplished by a predefined visual style with a glass
ball effect, 3D structure images, and STRING-style labels. To make
all information provided to stringApp by the server more accessible
to the user, stringApp displays it in a completely new
STRING
Results
panel, which contains protein localization filters
for the nodes in addition to confidence score filters for the edges.
stringApp Enrichment
One of the main features of stringApp
is the ability to retrieve and visualize functional enrichment for
all gene set categories available in the STRING functional enrichment:
Gene Ontology annotations,
25
UniProtKB
keywords,
26
KEGG pathways,
21
Reactome pathways,
27
WikiPathways,
28
Monarch human phenotypes,
29
Pfam
30
and SMART
31
protein domains, InterPro protein features,
32
and local STRING clusters.
33
Recently, three new categories were added based on disease-gene
associations, subcellular and tissue localization extracted from the
DISEASES,
15
COMPARTMENTS,
16
and TISSUES
17
databases, respectively.
stringApp uses a RESTful API to send the list of STRING identifiers
from the current network or a user-specified selection and receives
all enriched terms with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 from
the STRING web server in a JSON file format. The JSON file is parsed
to create the enrichment table shown under the
STRING Enrichment
tab in the Cytoscape
Table Panel
. From this table
the user can filter the enrichment terms, remove redundant terms,
visualize selected enriched terms on the nodes, and export the enrichment
results to a file.
STRING also allows for another form of enrichment
analysis, namely publication enrichment. For this, each open-access
full-text article from PMC and each abstract from PubMed is considered
a gene set, consisting of the genes found mentioned in the text by
automatic text mining.
33
This enrichment
category is provided separately from the functional enrichment and
can be retrieved using the
Enriched publications
menu
or button in stringApp. The enriched publications with corresponding
title, year of publication and set of genes are displayed in the
STRING Publications
tab in the Cytoscape
Table Panel
and can be sorted by any of the columns, e.g., by year.
The
latest version of stringApp is able to retrieve enrichment
not only for a single set of nodes but for several nonoverlapping
groups of nodes in the network. To define the groups, the user chooses
a node attribute column, which could be part of the data imported
by the user or, for example, the result of network clustering. Then,
stringApp sends a request to the STRING enrichment API for each group,
parses the results and displays them as separate enrichment tables
in a drop-down menu in the
STRING Enrichment
tab.
Each table can be viewed, filtered, and exported independently.
One final new addition to the enrichment functionality is the possibility
to add enriched terms as additional nodes to the table. In the
STRING Enrichment
table, the user can right-click an enriched
term and add it to the network. The resulting heterogeneous network
will contain a new node representing the term (with node type
enriched_term
) and new edges between it and all proteins
annotated with it (with interaction type
enrichment
). The information about the enriched term, including the FDR value,
the enrichment category, and the number of input and background genes
the term annotates, is stored as node attributes.
Specific Data
and Analyses for Use Cases
For the first
case study, we use a SARS-CoV-2 interaction network that contains
332 high-confidence protein interactions between SARS-CoV-2 proteins
and human proteins.
12
The interactions
were identified by affinity-purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS)
analysis for 26 of the 29 SARS-CoV-2 proteins that could be cloned,
tagged and expressed in human cells. The data are publicly available
as Supplementary Table 2 of Gordon et al.
12
and were downloaded on the eighth of July 2022. To make it easier
to use the group-wise enrichment functionality of stringApp, we added
a column
Bait_ID
that, for each prey, contains the
name of the bait (provided as
Table S1
).
All analyses were performed in Cytoscape version 3.9.1 with stringApp
version 2.0 and clusterMaker2 app
34
version
2.2 and are provided as Cytoscape sessions (
10.6084/m9.figshare.21313611
).
Results and Discussion
stringApp at a Glance
The main goal
of stringApp remains
to provide a seamless connection between two widely used resources,
the STRING database and the Cytoscape platform. This is accomplished
by (1) facilitating retrieval of STRING interaction networks from
within Cytoscape, (2) automatically annotating the nodes and edges
with information from STRING and associated databases, (3) providing
a visualization that is as close as possible to that of the STRING
web resource, and (4) allowing networks created in the STRING web
resource to be sent to Cytoscape.
When using stringApp, the
first step is to obtain an initial network. This can be done using
either of five different query types, or by converting an existing
network to a STRING-like network via the new
STRINGify network
functionality. The next step is often to modify the network by increasing/decreasing
the confidence score, switching between functional associations and
physical interactions, or expanding the network with additional nodes,
be it small molecule compounds or additional proteins from the same
or another species.
Depending on the biological questions, the
next steps can include
inspecting individual nodes or edges, visualizing the user’s
own data on the network, clustering the network, or performing enrichment
analysis. In
Figure
1
, we show three example workflows, one representing the analysis
of proteomics data
35
shown in the original
stringApp publication,
3
one showing how
external data on virus–host interactions can be combined with
data from STRING, and finally one highlighting the new cross-species
interaction networks in stringApp 2.0. Detailed tutorials with some
of the most common workflows can be found here:
https://jensenlab.org/training/stringapp/
.
Figure 1
Three example workflows for using stringApp in Cytoscape. While
the first one is based on the analysis of proteomics data described
in the previous stringApp publication,
3
the second and third represent the two use cases described here,
one focusing on an experimentally determined virus–host network
and the other on a host–parasite network retrieved with stringApp.
Colored boxes represent functionality implemented by stringApp.
Major New Features
Since the first
publication describing
stringApp,
3
we have continued to add new
functionality to the app, both to improve it for the existing user
base and to make it more broadly useful. Here we will briefly describe
the most exciting new features.
We have made many improvements
to the GUI, in particular creating a new
Results panel
(
Figure
2
). This
panel provides easy access to much of the information that was previously
only accessible through the
Node
and
Edge
tables
. It also allows nodes and edges to be filtered based
on their subcellular/tissue localization and underlying evidence,
respectively. Finally, the
Results panel
provides
quick access to many stringApp functions, such as changing the visual
properties of the nodes (e.g., the glass ball effect and display of
structure images), changing the network type or confidence cutoff,
and performing network clustering or enrichment analysis.
Figure 2
stringApp
Results panel
in Cytoscape. The
Nodes tab
(left) provides quick access to changing different
visual properties, running network analysis tasks, and filtering based
on tissue and subcellular localization. It also contains a panel with
information for each currently selected node, as shown for MCM3 (bottom
right). The
Edges tab
allows users to change the
network type and confidence as well as to filter and color the edges
based on evidence.
We have added the often
requested feature of retrieving functional
enrichment for each of many groups in a network. This can be particularly
useful after clustering a large network, as it allows for functional
characterization of the many resulting clusters at once. However,
to generalize this functionality, we do not limit it to cluster numbers
created by, for example, the clusterMaker2 app,
34
but allow users to choose any node attribute that defines
the groups. The enrichment functionality of stringApp has also been
expanded with publication enrichment, which allows users to identify
publications that mention surprisingly many of the genes/proteins
in their network.
Another common request was to be able to run
the enrichment analysis
of stringApp on networks from other sources. We have addressed this
by implementing new functionality, called
STRINGify
, which allows users to convert any network in Cytoscape to a new
network that contains the same set of nodes and edges, but is recognized
by the stringApp. This action gives users access to all the additional
node attributes retrieved by stringApp for the nodes that can be mapped
to STRING as well as most of the stringApp features, including enrichment
analysis. It also allows users to easily combine their own interaction
networks with information from STRING.
Starting with version
11.5, STRING distinguishes between two types
of interactions, namely functional associations and physical interactions.
stringApp provides the user with the options to choose which type
of network they want when querying and to change the type of an existing
network. Both types of networks come with confidence scores, which
indicate how likely two proteins are to participate in the same pathway,
in the case of functional associations, or be part of the same protein
complex, in the case of physical interactions.
While not part
of STRING, the backend database for stringApp has
been expanded with more than 58 million functional associations and
half a million physical interactions for host–parasite pairs.
To provide better access to these, as well as to the existing virus–host
interactions, we have implemented a dedicated query interface for
cross-species interactions. This new
STRING: cross-species
query
takes two different species as input and retrieves
a network with interactions within and between the selected species.
Currently, we have interaction data for 92 parasites and 124 hosts
as well as for 239 viruses and their 319 hosts.
We exemplify
the new features of stringApp through two case studies
that both focus on heterogeneous networks. In the first we show how
a published SARS-CoV-2 interaction map can be augmented and analyzed
with stringApp, and in the second how a cross-species network for
malaria can be retrieved and visualized. An example of how stringApp
can be used to create and visualize networks of chemical compounds,
proteins, and enriched terms can be found in the first stringApp publication
3
and in the recent paper about the Arena3D
web
interactive web tool.
36
SARS-CoV-2
Interaction Map
A new functionality in stringApp
is the ability to take a user-provided interaction network and map
the proteins to STRING. This augments the mapped proteins with all
the additional data normally provided by stringApp, such as protein
localization data, allows STRING interactions to subsequently be added
to the network, and enables the enrichment functionality.
To
exemplify this, we start by importing an affinity purification-based
interaction network for SARS-CoV-2 proteins and human host proteins
into Cytoscape. We downloaded the supplementary table with the SARS-CoV-2
interaction map from Gordon et al.,
12
in
which the viral proteins were used as baits, and their human interaction
partners were identified as preys. We used the standard
Import
network from file
functionality to load this interaction
network into Cytoscape. Next, we used the new
STRINGify network
functionality of stringApp to create a new network, in which all
the human proteins have been mapped to the corresponding proteins
in STRING. In this new network, the viral proteins are left as-is,
and the original edges are copied over. Although this network is not
a true STRING network per se, as neither the viral proteins nor any
of the edges are from STRING, this mapping is sufficient to enable
key features such as the enrichment analysis functionality of stringApp
for the network.
The latest version of stringApp can automatically
run enrichment
analysis individually for each cluster or group of proteins in a network.
In this use case, we define the groups based on the SARS-CoV-2 bait
proteins, so that the prey proteins for each bait are considered a
separate group. The result is an enrichment panel, which contains
a separate table for each bait protein, listing the statistically
significantly enriched terms among its prey proteins. Using this functionality
on the SARS-CoV-2 interaction map reveals, among other things, that
the viral glycoprotein orf8 interacts mainly with host glycoproteins,
that the membrane protein orf9c interacts exclusively with host membrane
proteins, and that the RNA-binding protein nsp8 interacts with RNA-binding
host proteins. More interestingly, it also shows that the nsp9 protein,
which attenuates nuclear transport,
37
interacts
with host proteins involved in nuclear pore disassembly, and that
five interactors of orf10 are involved in Cul2-RING ubiquitin ligase
hijacking by SARS-CoV-2. This illustrates how the group-wise enrichment
analysis in stringApp can be a powerful tool for interpreting protein
interaction data from, for example, AP-MS experiments.
Another
new type of enrichment analysis added to stringApp is publication
enrichment, in which each publication (PubMed abstract or full-text
open access article) is considered as a gene set, namely the genes
identified in it by automatic text mining.
33
Network-wide publication enrichment analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 interaction
map identified a paper about barrier-forming FG hydrogels
38
(
Figure
3
), which have been implicated in how viruses challenge the
selectivity of host nuclear pores.
39
The
proteins mentioned in the enriched paper (
Figure
3
, yellow nodes) interact with several SARS-CoV-2
proteins (nsp9, nsp15, and orf6).
Figure 3
Visualization of a STRINGified virus–host
network. The network
contains 332 high-confidence protein–protein interactions (red
edges) between SARS-CoV-2 (dark red nodes) and human proteins (gray
nodes) identified by affinity-purification mass spectrometry.
12
stringApp was used to fetch high-confidence
physical interactions between the human proteins (score cutoff ≥0.8,
gray edges) and to retrieve enriched publications. One of the publications
and the proteins it mentions are highlighted in the
STRING
Publications table
(light blue line) and in the network view
(yellow colored nodes).
Finally, we check if
the host proteins associated with the aforementioned
paper interact with each other, despite them not interacting with
the same viral bait proteins. To do so, we change the network type
to
physical
and lower the confidence cutoff from
1.0 (the default for a network without STRING edges) to 0.8, causing
stringApp to retrieve high-confidence physical protein interactions
from STRING. The host protein interactions retrieved in this way show
that the proteins found in the publication enrichment analysis indeed
interact with each other (
Figure
3
).
Malaria Cross-Species Network
In
the second use case,
we highlight some of the new stringApp features related to cross-species
networks between hosts and parasites, including network expansion
with interaction partners from other species. We also showcase how
the visualization of STRING networks can be improved using built-in
Cytoscape functionality and other Cytoscape apps, such as clusterMaker2.
34
For this, we chose to look at malaria, a mosquito-borne
parasitic infectious disease that affects humans.
40
We start by creating a STRING network of functional
associations using the new
STRING: cross-species query
with the two species
Homo sapiens
and
Plasmodium falciparum
(
Figure
4
A). If we used the
default confidence cutoff of 0.4 for this pair of species, we would
get a huge network of several thousands of nodes and hundreds of thousands
of edges. To avoid this, the confidence cutoff should be increased
in the query options (for example to 0.8)
before
starting
the network retrieval. The resulting high-confidence network contains
847 nodes and 3,904 edges, of which 306 nodes represent
P. falciparum
proteins and 1,001 edges are cross-species
interactions. By default, stringApp assigns the color teal to the
host proteins and the color red to the parasite proteins (first and
second species in the query, respectively).
Figure 4
Analysis of a malaria
cross-species network with stringApp in Cytoscape.
(A) stringApp user interface for cross-species queries. (B) stringApp
Expand network
options dialogue. (C) Network of
H. sapiens
(teal),
P. falciparum
(red), and
A. gambiae
(lime) proteins
and their high-confidence inter- and intraspecies interactions (score
cutoff 0.8). (D) All cross-species clusters after applying Markov
clustering (MCL) on the network. Human proteins are colored based
on the TISSUES confidence scores for liver.
The next step is to add proteins from
Anopheles
gambiae
, the major malaria vector,
41
that spreads the
P. falciparum
protozoan through its bite. As we are interested in which mosquito
proteins interact with the parasite, we first select all
P. falciparum
proteins using the built-in Cytoscape
selection filter with the node attribute
stringdb::species
. We then use the
Expand network
functionality of
stringApp to add up to 100 proteins from
A. gambiae
, which interact with the selected proteins with a confidence of
at least 0.8 (
Figure
4
B). In this case, the network is expanded by 35 mosquito proteins
and 357 inter- and intraspecies interactions, which by default are
placed in a grid layout next to the network. To show the overall interaction
pattern between the three species, we apply the built-in
Attribute
Circle layout
(with
name
as the attribute)
and use the Cytoscape functionality to bundle all edges (
Figure
4
C). However, even
at this high confidence cutoff, the network is very dense and not
so easy to explore.
The functional enrichment functionality
of stringApp can help provide
more insight about the proteins in the network. We can retrieve it
for the human proteins by pressing the
Functional enrichment
button in the
Results panel
and choosing
H. sapiens
from the species list. The analysis reveals
several enriched tissues, in particular
liver
, which
is in accordance with the known tissue tropism of
P.
falciparum
.
42
,
43
A common way
to simplify such large and dense networks is to perform
network clustering, which will identify groups of tightly connected
nodes, in this case, proteins likely to be in the same biological
process or pathway based on their functional associations. For user
convenience, there is a
Cluster network
(
MCL
) button in the stringApp
Results panel
, which internally calls the clusterMaker2 app.
34
This way, the clustering is already configured to use the
provided STRING edge confidence scores and create a view of the clustered
network. The dialogue suggests a default inflation value of 4, which
is usually suitable for dense STRING networks. In the resulting clustered
network, we identify several clusters that contain proteins from all
three species, including examples of human and mosquito proteins that
interact with the same parasite protein (
Figure
4
D). To highlight which of the interacting
human proteins are expressed in liver tissue, we use the tissue expression
information retrieved by stringApp from the TISSUES database together
with a continuous node color mapping, while bypassing the mapping
to set the node color of the other two species.
Conclusions
In summary, we have extended the Cytoscape
stringApp with several
new features and substantially improved its functionality. In particular,
we designed a new user interface for exploring the available information,
enabled automated enrichment analysis for several groups of nodes
at the same time, added a new query type for retrieving cross-species
networks as well as the option to STRINGify networks not created with
stringApp. Many of these extensions focus on the support of heterogeneous
networks, such as networks that contain nodes/edges from both STRING
and another source, networks with proteins from several different
species, and networks of proteins and selected terms from enrichment
analysis. We present most of the new functionality in two use cases
that both involve a cross-species network for human pathogens. The
improvements in stringApp 2.0 also lay the foundation for providing
other types of cross-species networks, such as symbiosis and microbiomes,
once such data become available.