Introduction
The microbiome is the community of microorganisms
inhabiting various
environments. Research on the microbiome developed rapidly in recent
years and in particular, the role of the microbiome in human health,
e.g., the human gut microbiota has been associated with type 2 diabetes,
1
inflammatory bowel diseases,
2
,
3
cardiovascular
disease,
4
and other diseases. Currently,
multiomics approaches including metagenomics, metatranscriptomics,
metaproteomics, and metabolomics provide comprehensive information
on microbiomes.
5
Constructing metagenome-assembled
genomes (MAGs) from metagenome data reveals the composition and predicted
functional potential of the complex community.
6
,
7
In
contrast, mass spectrometry (MS)-based metaproteomic strategies focus
on the characterization of the expressed proteins from the microbiome.
Metaproteomics provides dynamic insights into the functional, enzymatic,
and pathway changes occurring at the individual microbes and at the
systems microbiome level.
3
,
8
,
9
The experimental workflows of metaproteomics have similarities
to the conventional approaches in proteomics studies. Briefly, proteins
are extracted from the samples and digested into peptides, then subjected
to high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. The generated MS data sets
are searched against a theoretical protein sequence database to determine
the peptides and proteins. Taxonomic analysis and functional annotations
are performed based on the identified peptides and proteins using
specialized metaproteomics postanalysis tools.
10
In general, proteomics studies focus on single species.
In contrast, metaproteomic studies have to deal with complex microbiota
often with hundreds of different species, each having up to a few
different strains. Moreover, this is further complicated by significant
differences in microbiome compositions between individuals. This complexity
brings significant obstacles to the data analysis of metaproteomics
studies. In particular, the microbiota protein database is derived
from a gene catalog consisting of nonredundant genes, which could
come in two forms: (1) metagenomics/metatranscriptomic sequencing
of the sample of interest, which provides a sample-specific database,
and (2) integrated public gene catalogs. The quality of individualized
protein sequence databases derived from sample-specific metagenomics/metatranscriptomic
sequencing affects the identification of peptides. If a gene is missed
in the gene catalog database the corresponding protein cannot be detected.
It can be challenging to obtain a high-quality gene catalog database
for researchers who lack the resources and/or experience for deep
sequencing. An alternative approach is the use of a public microbiome
gene catalog database. These databases are always comprehensive but
are very large. For example, a commonly used human gut microbiome
database, the Integrated Gene Catalog (IGC) contains 9,879,896 sequences;
11
by contrast, the
Homo sapiens
database in Uniprot contains 20,361 sequences. A large database
produces enormous search space, which will cause an extremely long
data processing time and a low identification rate. We have developed
the MetaLab
12
,
13
software to solve the problem
of identifying peptides from huge gene catalog databases such as the
IGC. An iterative searching strategy
14
is
implemented in MetaLab, in which a first search is performed against
the gene catalog database to generate a refined database. Then a second
search against the refined database is performed for peptide identification.
Before the first search, a spectra cluster step is performed to select
the delegate spectra which will be used for the search, which can
greatly decrease the processing time. We also perform an open search
strategy in the second search to improve peptide identifications.
Although specially designed metaproteomics data analysis software
is available,
12
−
16
many studies still use conventional proteomic tools. A recent metaproteomic
benchmark study utilized four bioinformatic workflows for data analysis
and three of them were proteomic tools.
17
Their result showed that the proteomic toolset SearchGUI
18
/PeptideShaker
19
performed
best, but the highest spectra identification rate was only 34.79%
for fecal samples.
Another challenge of metaproteomics data
analysis is the taxonomic
assignment, which is usually performed based on the identified peptides/proteins
using specialized metaproteomics postanalysis tools. The taxonomic
information is retrieved from a peptide-to-taxon or protein-to-taxon
database, which is constructed from a repository of annotated proteins
such as NCBI and Uniprot. A drawback of this method is that it is
a generic solution but not specific to the target microbiome. For
example, a Uniprot-based peptide-to-taxon database will contain information
from all the species. A peptide will likely be matched to multiple
proteins from various species. For one peptide multiple taxonomic
lineages will be found in the database. In this case, a commonly used
algorithm named the lowest common ancestor algorithm (LCA) will be
used, which results in a situation where the taxonomic information
is usually obtained at a higher phylogenic level.
To address
these challenges, we developed a complete metaproteomics
data processing platform, MetaLab-MAG (metagenome-assembled genomes),
which uses the publicly available MAGs as the resource for peptide/protein
identification and genome-level taxonomic/functional annotation. Currently,
four MAGs databases in MGnify
20
including
Cow Rumen v1.0,
21
Unified Human Gastrointestinal
Genome (UHGG) v2.0,
22
Human Oral v1.0,
and Marine v1.0 were supported (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metagenomics/browse/genomes
). In this paper, we evaluated the performance of MetaLab-MAG by
analyzing human gut microbiota data sets with the UHGG 2.0 database
consisting of 4,744 species-level genomes. In these cases, the taxonomic
identification was restricted to the MAGs of the human gut microbiome,
which is more precise than acquired from NCBI or Uniprot whole databases.
To accelerate and improve the data processing, a two-step database
search strategy was utilized. The first search of the high-abundant
protein (HAP) database is used to generate the sample-specific MAGs
database,
23
and the second search against
the refined MAGs databases is used to identify peptides and proteins.
The results from multiple data sets demonstrated that the MS/MS identification
rates were close to or even exceeded the values obtained by searching
the customized or public gene catalog database from the same samples.
Analyzing the same fecal data set of the above benchmark study, the
average identification rate reached 52%. The reliability of the results
had been confirmed by comparing the data from searching the reference
or gene catalog database. MetaLab-MAG was used for qualitative and
quantitative analysis and supported both label-free and isobaric labeling-based
quantification. MetaLab-MAG is free for academic use and can be downloaded
from
https://imetalab.ca/
.
Methods
The Workflow of MetaLab-MAG
The workflow of MetaLab-MAG
is shown in
Figure
1
. In the first step, each raw file from microbiota analysis was searched
against a HAP database, which was composed of all the ribosomal and
elongation factor proteins from the MAGs. MetaLab-MAG utilized pFind
24
as the database search engine for the two-step
search. A target-decoy strategy was adopted in both the two search
steps for the assessment of the false discovery rate (FDR). Then,
a peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) list with FDR < 1% was generated
for each raw file. A PSM may have multiple possibilities for which
genome it came from, so the Occam’s razor principle was utilized
here to keep a minimized genome list that can explain the sources
of all the PSMs. The generated genome list was used to compose the
sample-specific MAGs database by adding all the proteins from the
selected genomes to the refined database. The next step was searching
each raw file against the sample-specific database. The open search
strategy has been demonstrated to be a valuable method not only for
identifying modified peptides but also for improving the overall identification
rate.
24
−
26
We have utilized the open search method in metaproteomics
data analysis and the identification at both the peptide and taxa
levels was significantly improved.
13
Therefore,
the open search strategy was used in this step. The target-decoy strategy
was used to evaluate the FDR, similarly. After the peptide and proteins
were identified, the results from each raw file were combined. A minimized
protein group list that can explain the attribution of all peptides
was kept. In the peptide list, for each peptide multiple source proteins
were listed. Furthermore, the protein with the highest pFind score
was selected as the razor protein for this peptide. In the quantification
part, the intensity of the peptide only contributed to the razor protein
and the corresponding genome. Both label-free and isobaric labeling
strategies were supported in this step. Taxonomic annotations based
on each genome and functional annotations based on each protein were
available for all of the four MGnify MAGs databases. This information
could be retrieved after the quantification of peptides, proteins,
and genomes was finished. Then according to the quantitative information,
data tables about the peptides, proteins, genomes, taxa, and functions
were exported. Visualized reports of the result were also available
in the form of web pages. If the metadata was provided, multivariate
statistical analyses such as a principal component analysis score
plot and a hierarchical clustering heatmap were generated as well
in the report.
Figure 1
Workflow of MetaLab-MAG. (1) raw files were searched against
the
HAP database consisting of 331,054 proteins; (2) from the search result
the possible components of the samples were determined, and proteins
from the corresponding genomes were added to compiled to create a
refined database; (3) the raws files were searched against the refined
database; (4) data tables in peptide, protein, taxa, genome, and function
levels were obtained.
The Construction of the MAGs Database
Currently, four
MAGs databases were available in MGnify, including Cow Rumen v1.0,
Unified Human Gastrointestinal Genome (UHGG) v2.0, Human Oral v1.0,
and Marine v1.0. Users can select and download what they need in MetaLab-MAG.
These public MAGs databases are constructed based on large-scale metagenomic
sequencing data from the target microbiomes. The enormous amount of
sequencing data is clustered into genomes representing the composition
of the microbiomes. In other words, all the genes/proteins in the
MAGs database belong to specific genomes. Proteins identified from
the MAGs could be readily linked to the corresponding genomes. Let
us take the UHGG for example. This database included 4,744 genomes
derived from the human gut microbiome. For each genome, the protein
sequence database, and taxonomic and functional information were available.
Based on the UHGG database, we constructed an integrated built-in
database in MetaLab-MAG for peptide/protein identification, taxonomy
analysis, and functional annotation. This database contained four
components: (1) the original protein sequence databases of the 4,744
genomes; (2) the functional annotation information generated by eggNOG
and taxonomy information based on Genome Taxonomy Database r202 (GTDB,
https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/
); (3) a HAP database including 331,054 sequences, which was created
by extracting all the ribosomal and elongation factor proteins from
the original database; (4) a host protein database, which was a
Homo sapiens
protein database downloaded from Uniprot
(
https://www.uniprot.org/
). The taxonomy information provided by the UHGG project was based
on GTDB. We added the corresponding NCBI taxon information for the
genomes to the taxonomic database. The taxonomy and function database
was packed within the MetaLab-MAG software and the other databases
can be downloaded from the MetaLab-MAG software interface, no manual
configuration step was required.
Sample Description and LC-MS/MS Acquisition
The data
set of the bacterial strain samples was obtained from a recent work
of our lab, in which we analyzed proteomic profiles of these strains
cultured with or without added sugars (glucose, sucrose, and kestose)
in a glucose-free Yeast Casitone Fatty Acids (YCFA) broth. Samples
were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. A 60
min gradient of 5 to 35% (v/v) buffer B at a 300 μL/min flow
rate was used to separate the peptides on a tip column (75 μm
inner diameter ×10 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (3 μm/120
Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany).
Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid (v/v), and buffer B was 0.1% formic
acid with 80% acetonitrile (v/v). The MS full scan ranging from 350
to 1200
m
/
z
was recorded in profile
mode with the resolution of 60,000. Data-dependent MS/MS scan was
performed with the 15 most intense ions with the resolution of 15,000.
Dynamic exclusion was enabled for duration of 30 s with a repeat count
of one. The data set of the four intestinal aspirate samples obtained
by high-pH reversed-phase fractionation and Orbitrap Exploris 480
mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was obtained from
our previous work, with a detailed experimental procedure described
before.
27
The data set of the TMT labeling
samples was obtained from our previous work with a detailed experimental
precedure described before.
28
Metagenomics Gene Catalog from Real Human Gut Microbiota Samples
Illumina paired-end reads from the microbiomes of four human gut
aspirate samples, i.e., HM454, HM455, HM466, and HM503, obtained from
another study
14
were used to construct
a gene catalog. The raw sequence data are accessible in NCBI under
the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) with the accession number SRP068619.
Raw reads were filtered to remove the adapter and low-quality sequences
with the trimming and quality filtering step of the MOCAT pipeline.
29
Reads with human origin were also filtered out
using the SOAP2
30
package by mapping the
sequences against the human genome database (hg19). The high-quality
reads were assembled into contigs using MEGAHIT v1.2.9
31
with default options. The sequence data of each
sample were assembled individually. The assembled contigs from the
four samples were then used for gene prediction with the prodigal
v2.6.3
32
software. The contigs were translated
into amino acid sequences using the anonymous gene prediction mode
(prodigal -p meta) and default parameters. The protein-coding gene
sequences of the four samples were compiled into FASTA files and used
as the metagenome-inferred protein database for benchmarking the MetaLab-MAG
pipeline. For the taxonomic annotation, the amino acid sequences of
the proteins in the catalog were searched against the UHGG database
with DIAMOND v2.0.15
33
using the blastp
command with default settings. To estimate the abundance of each predicted
protein sequence, the high-quality reads were first aligned to the
assembled contigs with minimap2 v2.24-r1122,
34
and the generated BAM files were used to create the read count matrix
of the protein sequences using featureCounts v2.0.1.
35
Metaproteomics Data Analysis
All the MetaLab-MAG workflows
in this paper utilized uniform parameter settings. The protein databases
were downloaded from
http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/metagenomics/mgnify_genomes/human-gut/v2.0/
. The host database was a reviewed human protein database from UniProtKB
containing 20,387 sequences. In the pFind open search workflow, modifications
were also accepted. Therefore, cysteine Carbamidomethylation was set
as the fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and protein N-term
acetylation were set as the variable modification. The enzyme was
set as trypsin. Fully specific digestion mode was used and up to two
miss cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerances of precursor and
fragment ions were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. The false discovery
rate was less than 1% at the PSM level. When using the iterative searching
strategy in MetaLab 2.3.0, the IGC human gut microbiome database was
used.
10
Other database searches in this
paper were all performed by pFind directly. The databases used for
the searches were described in the corresponding sections. Other parameters
were all consistent with these used in the MetaLab-MAG workflow.
Results
Sensitivity and Accuracy of MetaLab-MAG in Identifying Single
Bacterial Species
We first evaluated the performance of MetaLab-MAG
by analyzing samples with known taxonomic compositions. Here we used
a data set consisting of six sole species samples (
Supplementary Table 1
) to assess the sample-specific database
generation, and the qualitative/quantitative identification of peptides,
proteins, and taxa. As a comparison, we also analyzed this data set
by searching against the Uniprot single bacteria database and the
IGC database using the conventional iterative searching strategy in
MetaLab’s previous version (2.3.0).
We found that the
processing time was significantly decreased compared with searching
the IGC database in MetaLab 2.3.0 (
Figure
2
a). The time cost for peptide and protein
identification was only about 15% of the conventional iterative searching
method. The reason was although the total size of the MAGs database
was big, there was no need to search the whole MAGs database directly.
The first search was against a HAP database and the second search
was against the selected genomes. A target-decoy search could be performed
in both of the two steps which will benefit the FDR control. Then
we investigated if the correct species could be selected from the
MAGs database. The average MS/MS identification rate was 6.7% at FDR
< 1% by searching the HAP database. We matched the identified PSMs
to the corresponding Uniprot single species database and found that
94% of PSMs matched. According to these identifications, the identified
genomes were selected to generate the sample-specific database. On
average, 45 genomes and 117,375 proteins were contained in one database.
This result showed that the correct species were identified and their
proteins were selected successfully to form a proper-sized sample-specific
database.
Figure 2
Performance of MetaLab-MAG in the analysis of the single species
data sets. (a) The search times of the three methods including searching
against the UniprotDB, MetaLab-MAG workflow, and the conventional
iterative searching strategy. (b) The MS/MS identification rates of
the three methods. (c) The proportions of the PSMs can be found in
the UniprotDB. (d) The compositions and relative abundances of taxa
in the six single species data sets. (e) The MS/MS identification
rates of the human-
E. coli
samples.
The axis was the different amounts of
E. coli
spiked into the samples: A (2%), B (3%), C (4%), D (5%), and E (6%).
(f) The proportions of the PSMs from bacteria can be found in the
E. coli
UniprotDB. (g) the relative abundance of
E. coli
determined in the samples.
The peptide/protein identifications were obtained
by searching
the sample-specific MAG database, yielding MS/MS identification rates
that were similar to those by searching against the Uniprot single
species database (
Figure
2
b) and higher than those obtained from the conventional iterative
search method against the IGC database. Searching the Uniprot single-species
database was the ideal method for peptide identification from single-species
samples. However, in the MetaLab-MAG workflow, only a slight decrease
in the identification rates of about 5% was observed. Then we tested
if the PSMs were identified correctly from the expected species. The
Uniprot single species database was
in silico
digested,
and we matched the PSMs to the theoretical peptide sequences. It was
found that 97.1% of fully tryptic PSMs were matched with the corresponding
Uniprot single species database (
Figure
2
c). This result showed that although multiple
genomes were collected to create the sample-specific database, most
of the obtained PSMs and peptides were from the correct species through
the target-decoy search. The relative abundance of taxa identified
from the samples was shown in
Figure
2
d. It was observed that the taxonomic identification
was accurate at the genus level. For some of the samples, the relative
abundance of correct species was relatively low. This was because
part of the proteins was attributed to very similar species, as mentioned
above, the peptide identification was correct. Overall, the quantitative
results illustrated the same conclusion that the MetaLab-MAG workflow
successfully identified the target species from the single species
samples.
These results demonstrated that MetaLab-MAG can easily
identify
high-abundant bacteria. However, the human gut contains a highly diverse
microbial community with a significant number of microorganisms having
very low abundance. Hence, we tested whether the low abundant bacteria
could be identified from a spike-in sample, i.e., a data set of human
cell samples mixed with
Escherichia coli
at different concentrations (2, 3, 4, 5, or 6%).
36
MetaLab-MAG provided a workflow enabling the identification
of host proteins simultaneously by concatenating a human protein database.
By this strategy, we found that the MS/MS identification rate reached
72% and was higher than searching a
Homo sapiens
-
E. coli
combined database (
Figure
2
e,
Supplementary Table 2
). The proportion of non-
Homo sapiens
PSMs from
E. coli
was about 97% (
Figure
2
f). The relative quantitative results also fitted well with the expected
values 1-, 1.5-, 2-, 2.5-, or 3-fold (
Figure
2
g). This result shows that relatively low
abundant components could also be identified and quantified correctly
using MetaLab-MAG.
From these results, we demonstrated that
MetaLab-MAG is an efficient
and reliable tool for metaproteomic data analysis. First, MetaLab-MAG
outperformed the conventional iterative search strategy in sensitivity,
accuracy, and searching speed. Second, compared with the ideal matched
Uniprot database search, the loss of the MS/MS identification rate
was less than 5%. Considering the database used in MetaLab-MAG was
a generic MAGs database consisting of 4,744 genomes, identifying single
species samples with high sensitivity and accuracy was encouraging.
Evaluation of MetaLab-MAG Using Synthetic Microbial Community
We then used MetaLab-MAG to analyze a data set derived from a synthetic
microbial community named SIHUMIx. The SIHUMIx sample was composed
of eight types of bacteria found in the human gut microbiome.
37
We determined that all eight species had corresponding
genomes in the UHGG database. There were 139 genomes in UHGG that
were found from the same genera of the eight microbes (
Supplementary Table 3
). In the following analysis,
we defined the PSMs/peptides from the genomes of the correct species
as “correct species identifications” and PSMs/peptides
from the 139 genomes of the correct genus as “correct genus
identifications”. We analyzed 15 raw files by searching against
the HAP database, and 67,748 PSMs were obtained at FDR < 1% with
the MS/MS identification rate at 4.4%. The correct genus identifications
accounted for 93.5% of the PSMs and 90.8% of the peptide. Two microbes
(
Clostridium butyricum
DSMZ 10702 and
Lactobacillus plantarum
DSMZ 20174) were not found
in all the 15 raw files and
Lactobacillus plantarum
DSMZ 20174 was only found in 7 raw files. Actually, these three
microbes cannot be found from the metagenomics database (termed DB2MG
below) based on the assembled contigs, either, suggesting their relative
abundances were very low in the samples (
Supplementary Table 3
).
17
Sample-specific databases
were generated based on these identifications. On average, 82 genomes
and 212,644 proteins were contained in one sample-specific database.
These results show that by searching the HAP database, the high-abundance
components of the samples were effectively identified and could be
retrieved to form the sample-specific database.
The overall
identification rate using the above generated sample-specific MAG
database reached 58%, which was slightly higher than searching against
the DB2MG (57.1%) and the selected eight species database from Uniprot
(53.4%) (
Figure
3
a).
As well, most of the peptides identified by these three methods were
the same (
Figure
3
b,
Data S1
,
S2
,
S3
). This suggested
valid peptide identifications from searching against the three different
types of databases. Theoretically, the most suitable database for
metaproteomics data analysis was a reference database with proper
size or a sequencing read-based database. This result proved that
optimal performance was achieved using the MetaLab-MAG strategy.
Figure 3
Use of
MetaLab-MAG for the analysis of SIHUMIx samples. (a) The
MS/MS identification rates and numbers of identified PSMs of the three
methods including searching against the DB1UNIPROT, DB2MG, and MetaLab-MAG
workflow. (b) The identified peptides shared a great common part among
the three methods. (c) The proportions of the PSMs with correct species
identifications and correct genus identifications. (d) The compositions
and relative abundances of taxa calculated from the DB1UNIPROT, DB2MG,
and MetaLab-MAG workflows.
Next, we investigated the results at the taxon
level. It was found
that 1,041,817 PSMs were identified from bacteria, at the same time
1,018,307 (97.7%) were from correct species and 1,029,947 (98.9%)
were from correct genus (
Figure
3
c,
Supplementary Table 4
). By contrast, only 393,345 (38.1%) and 869,219 (84.1%) PSMs were
identified from the correct species and correct genus, respectively,
by searching the DB2MG. The huge difference did not come from the
peptide level, but the taxa level. The taxonomic annotations of the
metagenomics database were against the NCBI database on the protein
level, which was not perfectly matched to the theoretic compositions.
For example, for the DB2MG, it was found that 382 proteins were from
the species
Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum
(correct species in SHUMIx) but 1,012 proteins were from the species
Coprobacillus
sp. 3_3_56FAA
(incorrect
species in SHUMIx). As a result, for the DB2MG, 84,981 PSMs were from
Coprobacillus
sp. 3_3_56FAA
and
only 9,425 PSMs were from the correct species
Erysipelatoclostridium
ramosum
. The 84,981 PSMs matched to
Coprobacillus
sp. 3_3_56FAA
corresponded
to 6,833 unique peptide sequences, among which 6,217 peptide sequences
were also identified from the MetaLab-MAG workflow and 6,164 (99.1%)
of them were from the genome “MGYG000001400” (
Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum
). This result showed
a major advantage of using the MAGs database for the metaproteomics
data analysis. In the MAGs database, the taxonomic annotations were
generated at the genome level; moreover, these genomes were constructed
from the target microbiome. As a comparison, the taxonomic annotation
of the metagenomics database was performed at the protein level against
the NCBI nonredundant database, which was more general and less sensitive.
From the quantitative result, we also observed that the relative abundance
of the taxa was more similar between the Uniprot database search results
and the MetaLab-MAG results (
Figure
3
d).
Through the analysis of the SIHUMIx data
set, we found that MetaLab-MAG
fulfilled our requirement to successfully identify and quantify the
components of a simplified human gut microbiome. Similar MS/MS identification
rates and better performance of taxonomy analysis were achieved compared
with the workflows searching against reference and metagenomic sequencing
databases.
Application of Label-Free Metaproteomics of Human Gut Microbiota
We then explored the application of MetaLab-MAG for the analysis
of individual human gut microbiota samples. The first data set was
from fecal samples analyzed by the Critical Assessment of MetaProteome
Investigation (CAMPI) project with available metagenomics and metatranscriptomics
sequencing data.
17
Another human metaproteomic
data set included four intestinal aspirate samples collected from
pediatric individuals.
27
For the deeper
measurement of these samples, in addition to the conventional liquid
chromatographic separation (
1D
in
Figure
4
a), a two-dimensional separation was adopted.
High-pH reversed-phase fractionation was used first and then each
fractionation was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Metagenomic sequencing
data were available for this data set. The taxonomic annotation was
performed by DIAMOND
38
against the UHGG
2.0 database. Here we analyzed the CAMPI and the intestinal aspirate
data sets using MetaLab-MAG (
Data S4
–
S9
). Meanwhile, these two data sets were also searched against the
corresponding multiomics databases (
Data S10
,
S11
).
Figure
4
a shows
the MS/MS identification rates of the samples, which illustrated that
for the analysis of real human gut microbiome samples, the performance
of MetaLab-MAG was still similar to searching the metagenomics database.
At the same time, the identification rates were 21.3% to 66.3%, which
were much higher than that obtained by the SearchGUI/PeptideShaker
workflow in the CAMPI study (12% to 34.8%)
17
(
Data S4
). It was worth noting that MetaLab-MAG outperformed
the metagenomic database searching result from the intestinal aspirate
samples. We compared the identified peptides and found that for each
data set, the identified peptide sequences from the two strategies
had significant overlap. (
Figure
4
b). MetaLab-MAG analysis of the CAMPI fecal samples
identified 110,993 peptides, 17,235 protein groups, and 678 genomes.
Higher MS/MS identification rates and more peptide identifications
were obtained by MetaLab-MAG workflow in the analysis of the intestinal
aspirate samples. The numbers of identified proteins and genomes from
the four samples were shown in
Figure
4
c,d. Nearly 10,000 proteins and 200 genomes could be
obtained from a single raw file of the 1D-separation experiments and
the 2D-separation yielded about triple the number of proteins and
four times genome identifications.
Figure 4
Analysis of real human gut microbiota
samples. (a) The MS/MS identification
rates of the data sets. CAMPI-fecal: fecal samples from the CAMPI
projects, 15 raw files were used here; 1D: 1D-LC-MS/MS analysis of
the four samples (i.e., HM454, HM455, HM466, and HM503); the 2D data
sets were 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis of the above four samples. “Metagenomics
DB” represents that the peptide identifications were obtained
by searching against the metagenomic sequencing database directly.
(b) The Venn figures showed the overlaps of the peptide identifications
from the samples between MetaLab-MAG and metagenomic database searching
method. (c) the protein and (d) the genome counts identified from
1D and 2D experiments of HM454, HM455, HM466, and HM503 samples. (e)
The correlation of the relative abundance of genomes determined by
MetaLab-MAG and metagenomic database searching method from HM454-2D.
(f) The relative abundance of the taxa calculated by metagenomic read
counts, metagenomic database searching method and MetaLab-MAG from
HM454-2D.
Since the performances of the multiomics database
searching strategy
and the MetaLab-MAG workflow were similar in identification, we compared
the quantitative results obtained by the two methods. As a representative,
Figure
4
e showed a good correlation
between the relative abundances of genomes quantified by the two methods
from HM454-2D samples. Finally, we compared the taxa composition estimated
using three different methods based on (1) the read counts of the
metagenomic data; (2) the metaproteomics result searching against
the metagenomic database; (3) the metaproteomics result by MetaLab-MAG
(
Figure
4
f). We found
that the relative abundances of taxa were very similar between the
two metaproteomic workflows. In the previous part, different trends
in the relative abundance of taxa were observed between these two
types of results, mainly because the taxonomic annotation was performed
based on the NCBI but not the UHGG database. The taxa information
obtained by MetaLab-MAG and searching the metagenomic database were
quite consistent, which demonstrated the credibility of the quantitative
information provided by MetaLab-MAG and the multiomics database workflow.
Obvious differences were observed compared to the metagenomics results
(read counts), which suggested combining metagenomics and metaproteomics
methods will help the researchers get a better profile of the microbiota
samples.
Through the analysis of these data sets from the real
human gut
microbiota samples, we found that although the multiomics database
was decent for the metaproteomics analysis, MetaLab-MAG provided an
alternative solution for the interpretation of human gut microbiota
samples, which showed similar or better performance. This will greatly
expand the applicability of metaproteomics in the analysis of human
gut microbiota samples, in particular for samples without matched
multiomics data.
Application of Isobaric Quantitative Analysis of Human Gut Microbiota
Samples
The most prominent advantage of isobaric labeling
strategies is the multiplexing capability, enabling the relative quantification
of more than 10 samples in a single MS run. This technique will greatly
reduce the MS running time in high-throughput experiments such as
drug screening and clinical sample analysis. The commonly used isobaric
labeling methods including tandem mass tag
39
(TMT) and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification
40
, (iTRAQ) are all supported in MetaLab-MAG. Here
we tested three TMT11plex labeled human gut microbiome data sets (
Data S12
–
S14
). The MS/MS identification
rates exceeded 50% in all three data sets (
Figure
5
a). Generally, over 4,500 protein groups
could be identified from a single raw file (
Figure
5
b).
Figure 5
Qualitative and quantitative results of isobaric
labeled data sets
obtained by MetaLab-MAG. (a) The MS/MS identification rates of the
three data sets. (b) The identified protein counts of the three data
sets. (c) The correlations of the abundances of genomes between replicated
samples from different experiments. The values on axis X and Y are
log10(intensity) of the genomes. (d, e) UMAPs of the samples using
the genome intensities (d) and protein intensities (e) show a clear
trend that samples under the same treatment are clustered together.
BL, KES, and PBS: the buffer solutions. (f) The abundances (represented
by the log10(intensity)) and (g) relative abundances of eight high-abundance
species (relative abundance >2%) in different buffer-treated samples.
Another advantage of isobaric labeling methods
was higher accuracy
because samples in different channels were injected into MS analysis
together, which greatly reduced the variability from different batch
injections. However, if the number of samples exceeded the channels
of the isobaric labeling reagent, multiple experiments were still
required to quantify all the samples, which can introduce variability.
To solve this problem, we took two measures. First, the MS1 intensity
was utilized for the quantification and the normalization of the MS1
intensity was adopted. The intensities of the reporter ions were used
to determine the relative abundances of the peptides from different
channels, and the abundance of each peptide was calculated as the
corresponding normalized MS1 intensity multiplied by the proportion
of the reporter ion’s intensity. Second, a reference channel
with the same sample in every experiment was required. According to
the quantitative information on the reference channel, all the channels
in different experiments could be aligned and normalized. To assess
the accuracy of the quantitative results, we compared the calculated
genome abundances between the replicate experiments from different
raw files. After the normalization and alignment, good correlations
between the replicate experiments were observed (
Figure
5
c). In particular, we noticed
that the higher the abundance of the genomes, the smaller the deviation
observed. This illustrated that the quantitative information on the
high-abundance species was credible, even though the comparison was
taken across different MS runs.
An isobaric labeling strategy
was suitable for large-scale quantitative
analysis. For example, in
Data 3
we tested the impacts
of live microbiota frozen conditions and treatment of kestose on ex
vivo cultured human gut microbiota. More details can be found in our
previous study.
28
We built two UMAPs based
on the quantitative information on the genomes and proteins, respectively
(
Figure
5
d,e). It was
observed that all the samples were clustered based on the culturing
conditions, which was in conformity with our expectations and reflected
the confidence of the quantitative results. It was also observed that
the samples were better distinguished at the protein level than at
the genome level. Based on the quantitative information in all the
peptides, proteins, genomes/taxa, and function levels, we can interpret
the data from various angles.
Figure
5
f showed the total intensities of eight high-abundance
taxa (relative abundance above 2%) in different groups. All of them
got higher abundances in PBS-treated samples. However, different trends
were observed in the relative abundances (
Figure
5
g). The relative abundances of
Phocaeicola dorei
and
Alistipes putredinis
were lower than in BL and KES.
In this part, we analyzed multiple
metaproteomic data sets with
isobaric labeling quantitative methods. The performance of MetaLab-MAG
was quite stable and reliable. Generally, 4,500 to 5,000 protein groups
could be identified with a ∼90 min MS run at the MS/MS identification
rate higher than 50%. The accuracy of the quantitative results was
verified by comparing the replicated samples from different labeling
experiments. The information on the abundance was readily available
on various levels including proteins, genomes/taxa, and functions.
Investigating the responses to different conditions was straightforward
based on the information provided by MetaLab-MAG. We believed that
MetaLab-MAG could be a helpful tool for researchers aiming to study
the changes of the human gut microbiota samples, not only on the composition
level but also the active functions.
Discussion
In metaproteomics data analysis, customized
gene catalog databases
from the metagenomics/metatranscriptomics sequencing of individual
samples are generally perceived as the most reliable databases for
peptide identification from the same microbiota samples. However,
in the majority of projects, the sequencing information is not available,
and instead searches against a generic gene catalog database would
be performed. The drawback is that the generic gene catalogs contain
numerous bacterial genomes, the vast majority of which are not present
in a specific sample. Usually, the size of the generic database is
huge, and identifying peptides against the database suffers from a
long processing time and low identification rate.
MetaLab integrates
the iterative search strategy and enables the
characterization of the microbiome from the public gene catalog. However,
the taxonomic and functional information on the gene catalog is annotated
based on the gene. The relationship between different genes/proteins
is nonexistent. By contrast, in this work, we develop MetaLab-MAG,
a specialized metaproteomic data analysis tool, using publically available
MAGs databases for peptide/protein identification. A significant advantage
for metaproteomics in using the MAGs database is that the genomes
are constructed with additional information such as which genes are
likely from the same species. The sequencing read-based protein database
from metagenomics and/or metatranscriptomics is not required. An efficient
refined database generation strategy, namely high-abundance protein
database search,
23
is adopted in MetaLab-MAG.
Compared to the conventional iterative searching method, searching
the HAP database is more efficient and accurate, yielding more identifications
in less time. Moreover, the performance is comparable to or even better
than searching the corresponding multiomics database. The MS/MS identification
rates are similar, and the identified peptides shared significant
common parts. The taxonomic information is obtained at the genome
level. One current drawback of the MAGs database is the more limited
taxa identification. However, with the continuous improvement of the
MAGs database in the public data repository (such as MGnify), the
taxonomic identification results will be more reliable.
Sample-specific
metagenomics/metatranscriptomics can be used for
metaproteomic data analysis; however, the reality is that they are
not routinely performed on all samples and the lack of corresponding
information should not hinder the application of metaproteomics. That
is the motivation for the development of MetaLab-MAG. MetaLab-MAG
is readily accessible to researchers with limited bioinformatics backgrounds.
The researchers only need to provide their MS raw files. The MAGs
databases for peptide/protein identification, taxonomy analysis, and
functional annotation can be downloaded in MetaLab-MAG with a click.
We anticipate that with the improvement of MGnify resources, other
types of microbiomes would be supported for analysis. Rich information
is generated automatically, including all data tables at the peptide,
protein, genome, taxonomy, and function levels. The web-based report
contains many useful charts and is usable for research manuscripts.
The continuous development of MetaLab-MAG will include in the future
more statistical functions to help the research community better understand
their data sets. We believe that MetaLab-MAG can help researchers
from various fields interested in using metaproteomics to investigate
microbiomes.