Introduction
Large-scale
omics data resources, such as the International Cancer
Genome Consortium (ICGC)
1
and the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA),
2
have greatly helped
us understand the characteristics of a wide variety of cancers. Through
these data resources, molecular aberrations at DNA, RNA, and epigenetic
levels can be systematically identified for screening novel biomarkers
or candidate drug targets.
3
,
4
The study of genomics
and transcriptomics is the first step toward precision oncology, and
proteomics has, in many quarters, been considered the next logical
step in expanding our understanding of tumor biology because it provides
information that complements genomic and transcriptomic data.
5
Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium
(CPTAC) is a project that aims to accelerate the understanding of
the molecular basis of cancer through the application of large-scale
proteome and genome analysis.
6
CPTAC has
so far produced proteomic and phosphoproteomic data across 15 different
types of tumors, covering over 2000 patients. However, the statistical
analysis and data visualization provided by the data portal of CPTAC
are not convenient enough for researchers with limited bioinformatics
skills, thus limiting the potential values of CPTAC data sets. Therefore,
it is important to develop user-friendly tools to analyze and visualize
the data sets in CPTAC. A key step toward understanding cancer is
to analyze the changes of proteins as well as post-translational modifications
(PTMs) such as phosphorylation in tumor tissues through proteomic
and phosphoproteomic data. The differential expression of proteins
between normal and tumor tissues is generally analyzed through statistical
methods.
7
Many potential biomarkers and
therapeutic targets have been identified based on abnormally expressed
proteins in a variety of cancers, including esophageal cancer,
8
breast cancer,
9
colorectal
cancer,
10
liver cancer,
11
and so on. Besides the changes in abundance, proteins generate
tremendous diversity, complexity, and heterogeneity through PTMs.
There are currently over 300 different types of PTMs, but only a few
have been studied in depth,
12
including
phosphorylation, methylation, acetylation, ubiquitin, glycosylation,
etc. How to systematically and comprehensively study these PTMs is
one of the main challenges in proteomics research. Protein phosphorylation,
principally on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues, is one of
the most important and well-studied post-translational modifications.
Protein phosphorylation plays a critical role in both physiological
and pathological conditions.
13
Therefore,
proteomic and phosphoproteomic data may provide precious insights
into tumor biology that cannot be deciphered by genomic analysis.
Currently, there are many excellent web tools for statistical analysis
and data visualization of cancer genomic and transcriptomic data,
including cBioPortal,
14
GEPIA,
15
UALCAN,
16
,
17
and so on. cBioPortal
is focused on tumor samples and provides an interface for cancer genomic
data download and visualization. GEPIA provides interactive analysis
of transcriptome data from TCGA and GTEx.
18
,
19
UALCAN provides multiform data analysis by using transcriptomic
data well as pan-cancer expression analysis based on proteomic data.
In addition, HPA provides an atlas analysis of tissue, blood, cells,
and organs based on proteomic, transcriptomic, and system biology
data resources.
20
HPA can also provide
protein abundance analysis according to immunohistochemistry, but
is limited to tumor tissues. LinkedOmics provides interactive analysis
across 10 cancer types based on proteomic and phosphoproteomic data,
but the operating logic is complex and must specify one gene as the
core in the analysis.
21
Taken together,
none of the tools can take full advantage of the proteomic and phosphoproteomic
data from CPTAC or other published data sets for systematic statistical
analysis and visual exhibition of proteins and phosphorylation sites
in both normal and cancer samples. To address these unmet needs, we
developed CPPA (Cancer Proteome and Phosphoproteome Atlas), a comprehensive
web tool to identify aberrant patterns of proteins and phosphorylation
sites that are correlated to clinical records in cancer.
Methods and Results
Data Collection
The data sets included in CPPA were
collected from published data sets (
Table S1
), most of which were downloaded from CPTAC, which encompasses mass
spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic data, phosphoproteomic data, and
clinical records from over 2000 cancer patients. The operation processes
of the proteome and phosphoproteome based on mass spectrometry are
complex, and the quality of data generated by different institutions
or laboratories could be largely different. Considering the current
situation of proteomic data and the intention of the website design
herein, five criteria were applied for screening the data sets. First,
proteomic data should be labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags, such
as isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification reagents
(iTRAQ) and tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents, which improve the data
quality and reproducibility. Second, phosphoproteomic data must be
produced together with the proteomic data using the same batch of
samples. Third, tumor tissues must be collected before the patients
are treated. Fourth, normal samples must be produced in the same project
based on the predesigned prototype of this database. Fifth, the number
of samples must be greater than 50. The final data sets included in
CPPA contained 13 different types of cancer samples, covering nearly
1500 patients.
Data Preprocessing
Proteomic and
phosphoproteomic raw
data were downloaded from the CPTAC data portal or PRIDE (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/
). All proteomic and phosphoproteomic raw data from different sources
have been recomputed through a standard pipeline to minimize the abiologic
difference.
MaxQuant software (version 2.0.2.0) was used to
analyze MS raw files.
22
MS/MS spectra were
searched against the reviewed SwissProt human proteome database and
a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine.
23
If the “internal reference”, such
as a mixed sample, exists, the reference channel will be set according
to the corresponding plex, and the normalization method will be set
as “Weighted ratio to reference channel”.
24
Carbamidomethylation was applied as fixed and
N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at NQ, and methionine oxidation
as variable modifications. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and
tyrosine (S, T, and Y) was set as variable modifications in analysis
pipeline of phosphoproteomic raw data. Enzyme specificity was set
to “Trypsin/P” or “Trypsin/P + LysC” with
a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7
amino acids according to corresponding published papers. A false discovery
rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. Peptide
identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass
deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of
20 ppm. Protein identification required at least 1 “razor +
unique peptides”. Data were filtered for common contaminants
in proteomic data and phosphoproteomic data, and protein groups only
identified by peptides with modifications were excluded from further
analysis in proteomic data.
Standard pipeline analysis of proteomic
raw data consumed approximately
100 000 h of CPU time, while the phosphoproteomics analysis
pipeline took nearly 600 000 h of CPU time to run out.
To mitigate systematic and sample-specific bias in the quantification,
the expression ratios were log
2
-transformed and normalized
using the median centering method across proteins and phosphorylation
sites.
Finally, we generated a structured table containing the
information
about the number of samples and identified proteins and phosphorylation
sites in each data set (
Table S1
).
Clinical information was downloaded from the CPTAC data portal
or obtained from published papers. Major clinical parameters, including
clinical stage, pathological stage, histological grade, age, gender,
survival time, and vital status of all cancer patients, were further
organized into structured data tables.
Implementations
The web tool was hosted by Nginx in
ubuntu 20.04. The back end was implemented using Flask v2.0.2. All
processed data described above were imported and stored into SQLite
relational database. The front end was built using HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript, including the Bootstrap framework (v4) for the styling
and jQuery for HTML scripts. Statistical results are generated by
Python or R. Analysis results in CPPA were exhibited by tables or
plots. Tables are created by Bootstrap Table (
https://bootstrap-table.com/
) and plots are generated by plotly.js library (
https://plot.ly/
) or R package ggplot2.
Survival analysis is generated by R package survminer (
Figure
1
).
Figure 1
Schema describing data
processing and data display for the CPPA
web tool.
Functionalities
Functionalities of CPPA are divided
into multiple major modules: General analysis, Differential profile,
Protein phosphorylation analysis, Custom expression analysis, Correlation
analysis, Similarity analysis, and Survival analysis (
Figure
2
). The “Help”
webpage, provided by CPPA website, describes the full analysis tutorial
and detailed user manual (
https://cppa.site/cppa/tppa_help
).
Figure 2
Examples of CPPA interactive
results. (A) Users can query abundance
of proteins (upper panel) and distribution of phosphorylation sites
(bottom panel) by “General” module. (B) Differential
expression analysis is displayed by pie chart (upper panel, left)
and volcano plot (upper panel, right) in CPPA. The normalized expression
level, fold change, and
Q
value is shown in a table
(bottom panel). (C) Distribution (upper panel) and abundance of phosphorylation
sites (bottom panel) in proteins are displayed through lollipop plot
and heat map, respectively. (D) Customized expression analysis (left
panel), pathological stage analysis (right panel, upper), and comparison
analysis (right panel, bottom) are exhibited through box plot, violin
plot, and heat map, respectively. (E) CPPA provides correlation analysis
of pairwise proteins or phosphorylation sites, and query interface
of similar expression pattern through “Correlation and similarity
analysis” function. (F) CPPA provides survival analysis and
query results about survival relevant proteins and phosphorylation
sites.
General Analysis
Index of CPPA provides
a simple query
interface that takes Gene Symbol (e.g., SF3B1), UniProt ID (e.g.,
O75533
), or Ensembl
ID (e.g., ENSG00000115524) as input. After entering an identifier
and clicking the “Search!” button, the website will
navigate to pan-cancer analysis webpage, which presents the protein
expression profile by box plot or violin plot and the distribution
of phosphorylation sites through lollipop plot across all cancer types
(
Figure
2
A). In addition,
this module also provides basic information about proteins and external
websites linking to this protein, including UniProt, GeneCard, PhosphoSitePlus,
HPA, and so on.
Differential Profile
Dysregulation
of protein expression
or protein phosphorylation is one of the major causes of occurrence
and development of cancer.
25
Identifying
differentially expression profiles between normal and tumor tissues
is very helpful for inferring cancer driver factors, seeking specific
biomarkers, and screening potential anticancer drug targets.
26
CPPA provides an interface for exhibiting differential
abundance profiles for proteins and protein phosphorylation. The significance
of differences was calculated between normal and tumor samples by
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, and then the Benjamini–Hochberg
tutorial was applied to correct the
P
-values for
better accuracy. This module allows users to obtain the differential
expression profiles of tens of thousands of proteins and protein phosphorylation
sites in normal and tumor samples according to user-specified
P
-value and fold change cutoffs (
Figure
2
B). For proteomic data, CPPA also provides
functional enrichment analysis based on MsigDB aggregated gene sets,
such as Hallmark, GO, KEGG, Reactome, WikiPathway, among others (
Figure S1A
). In addition, kinase-substrate enrichment
analysis is added to CPPA for exploring kinase activity in cancer
(
Figure S1B
).
Protein Phosphorylation
Analysis
A protein can have
multiple phosphorylation sites, which are likely to be different in
abundance and molecular function. For example, depending on the sites
involved, phosphorylation of the Elk-1 TAD by a single kinase, ERK,
can either promote or inhibit mediator interaction, thereby modulating
transcriptional activation.
27
CPPA provides
an interface that allows users to query all phosphorylation sites
of a specific protein in a particular cancer type. The lollipop plot
exhibits the distribution of phosphorylation sites on the protein,
and the number of tissue samples in which these sites were identified.
The heat map shows log
2
-transformed median abundance of
phosphorylation sites across all normal and tumor tissues (
Figure
2
C). CPPA integrates
relationships between kinases and substrates from PhosphoSitePlus
and NetworKIN to inform users about potential kinases of the phosphorylation
site (
Figure S1C
). In addition, CPPA also
uses linear motif algorithm to predict kinases base on amino acid
sequence surrounding the phosphorylation site through Persues (
Figure S1D
).
Custom Expression Analysis
CPPA provides a module to
dynamically generate the abundance profile of a given protein or protein
phosphorylation sites based on user-defined cancer type. The results
are visualized by box plot along with text summarizing the detailed
statistical results and the number of samples. In addition, CPPA also
provides an interface for mapping expression abundance with pathological
stage based on structured patient clinical annotations. Furthermore,
comparison of different proteins or phosphorylation sites across multiple
cancer types can be done in CPPA website, and the analysis results
will be shown by heat map (
Figure
2
D).
Correlation and Similarity Analysis
CPPA provides a
module for correlation analysis of paired proteins or phosphorylation
sites, and results are shown by scatter plot. Users are free to choose
the algorithms used to calculate the correlation, such as the Pearson,
Spearman, and Kendall correlation analysis. Moreover, queries for
similar expression pattern of proteins or phosphorylation sites are
integrated into an interface with the same webpage structure. One
of the applications is to seek for proteins or phosphorylation sites
which are highly or inverse correlated with targets of interest in
terms of abundance (
Figure
2
E).
Survival Analysis
CPPA can provide
the survival curves
of user-specified protein or phosphorylation site in a given cancer
type, in which the Kaplan–Meier (KM) model is used to calculate
the survival probability along with death event and survival time.
Users can choose different stratification methods, such as Median,
Tertiles, Quartile, and Best-cutoff, to classify samples into either
high or low expression groups according to abundance. This module
also calculates
P
-value through log-rank test and
hazard ratio by cox proportional regression analysis. Besides, users
can also choose whether or not to display the 95% confidence interval
in survival curves. Similar to correlation analysis, CPPA also provides
an interface for screening proteins or phosphorylation sites that
are highly or inverse correlated with patient survival status in a
given cancer type. The rank of correlation is sorted according to
P
-value and hazard ratio (
Figure
2
F).
Conclusion and Discussion
CPPA is a comprehensive and interactive web tool for mining characteristics
of protein and protein phosphorylation sites from nearly 1500 patients
spanning 13 different types of cancers, making use of proteomic and
phosphoproteomic data from published data sets, particularly those
from CPTAC. In order to increase reproducibility of the analysis results,
CPPA standardizes the analysis pipeline through MaxQuant to reduce
nonbiological variations. CPPA provides a variety of analysis results
through multiple predesigned interactive web modules, including differential
expression analysis, protein phosphorylation analysis, expression
abundance analysis, correlation analysis, survival analysis, etc.
Analysis results include approximately 17 000 proteins and
more than 250 000 phosphorylation sites, covering the majority
of the human proteome and phosphoproteome. Through interactive web
operation, experimental biologists with basic bioinformatics skills
can click a button to retrieve a series of analysis results and obtain
images and tables for publication.
Because of the limitation
of available large-scale high-resolution
mass spectrometry-based data, proteomic and phosphoproteomic data
collected by CPPA only covered 13 cancer types. With the development
of cancer biology, CPPA will continuously collect more proteomic and
phosphoproteomic data from other cancer types and be updated accordingly.
Furthermore, PTMs is an important way to increase the functional diversity
of proteins. In addition to phosphorylation, methylation, glycosylation,
ubiquitination, acetylation, succinylation, other PTM types can almost
affect all aspects of protein function, promoting or suppressing cancer
development. We envision that CPPA can analyze more types of protein
modifications with the development of various PTM omics, providing
further insights into our understanding of cancer.