Introduction
High-throughput mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approaches
have matured and generalized significantly, becoming an essential
tool in biological research, sometimes together with other “omics”
approaches such as genomics and transcriptomics. It is now commonplace
to make quantitative measurements of 2,000–3,000 proteins in
a single LC–MS run and typically 6,000–7,000 proteins
in workflows with fractionation. The most used experimental approach
is data-dependent acquisition (DDA) bottom-up proteomics. Among existing
DDA quantitative proteomics approaches, label-free is very popular,
although labeled approaches such as metabolic labeling (e.g., SILAC)
and especially techniques based on the isotopic labeling of peptides
(e.g., TMT) are growing in importance. In bottom-up experiments, proteins
are first digested into peptides using an enzyme (e.g., trypsin),
and typically, several peptides are required per protein to give confidence
in the measurement of protein-level quantification across samples.
Measured peptide intensity is correlated with absolute protein abundance,
but there can be differences depending on individual peptides due
to the considerable variation in the ionization efficiency of these
peptides. Different peptides can also be detected in different studies,
giving rise to variability in protein abundance. One further challenge
in quantitative proteomics relates to the “protein inference”
problem.
1
In brief, many peptide sequences
cannot be uniquely mapped to a single protein due to common conserved
sequences present in different gene families (paralogs). During the
last decade, technological advances in MS have led to a large number
of studies that have analyzed protein abundances across various human
tissues and organs.
2
−
5
These efforts are complemented by the comprehensive characterization
of the human proteome performed within the Human Proteome Project
(HPP),
6
−
8
although the HPP has been focused on the identification
of proteins without performing any quantitative analysis.
In parallel with the technical developments in chromatography,
MS, and bioinformatics, the proteomics community has evolved to largely
support open data practices. In brief, this means that datasets are
released alongside publications, allowing other groups to check findings
or reanalyze data with different approaches to generate new findings.
Therefore, in recent years, the amount and variety of shared datasets
in the public domain have grown dramatically. This was driven by the
establishment and maturation of reliable proteomics data repositories,
in tandem with policy recommendations by scientific journals and funding
agencies.
The PRIDE database,
9
which is one of
the founding members of the global ProteomeXchange consortium,
10
is currently the largest resource worldwide
for public proteomics data deposition. As of October 2022, PRIDE hosts
more than 29,500 datasets. Of those, human datasets are by far the
majority, representing approximately 40% of all datasets. Public datasets
stored in PRIDE (or in other resources) present an opportunity to
be systematically reanalyzed and integrated in order to confirm the
original results potentially in a more robust manner, obtain new insights,
generate new hypotheses, and even be able to answer biologically relevant
questions orthogonal to those posed in the original studies. Such
integrative meta-analyses have already been successfully employed,
especially in genomics and transcriptomics.
11
−
13
Therefore,
the large availability of public datasets has triggered different
types of data re-use activities, including “big data”
approaches (e.g.,
14
−
16
) and the establishment of new data resources using
reanalyzed public datasets as the basis.
17
−
19
In this context
of data re-use, the main interest of PRIDE is to disseminate and integrate
proteomics data into popular added-value bioinformatics resources
at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), such as Expression
Atlas
20
(for quantitative proteomics data),
Ensembl
21
(proteogenomics), and UniProt
7
(protein sequence information including post-translational
modifications (PTMs)). The overall aim is to enable life scientists
(including those who are non-experts in proteomics) to have improved
access to proteomics-derived information. Expression Atlas (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/home
) is an added-value resource that enables easy access to integrated
information about gene and, recently, protein expression across species,
tissues, cells, experimental conditions, and diseases. The Expression
Atlas “bulk” Atlas has two sections: baseline and differential
atlas. Protein abundance results derived from the reanalysis of DDA
public datasets of different sources have started to be incorporated
into Expression Atlas. The availability of such results in Expression
Atlas makes proteomics abundance data integrated with transcriptomics
information in the web interface. We have performed two DDA studies
of this type so far. First of all, we reported the reanalysis and
integration into the Expression Atlas of 11 public quantitative datasets
coming from cell lines and human tumor samples.
22
Additionally, we have recently reported the reanalysis
and integration of 23 datasets coming from mouse and rat tissues in
baseline conditions.
23
There are other public resources providing access to reanalyzed
MS-based quantitative proteomics datasets. ProteomicsDB
24
provides access to human protein abundance data
in addition to other recent (multi-omic) studies carried out on model
organisms. Many additional human datasets derived from human tissues
have been made publicly available in recent years. Within the HPP,
it is important to highlight that ProteomeXchange resources PeptideAtlas
25
and MassIVE provide peptide and protein identifications
derived from the reanalysis of public human datasets, but their main
focus is not quantitative data. Additionally, antibody-based protein
abundance information can be accessed via the Human Protein Atlas
(HPA).
4
Here, we report the reanalysis
and integration of 24 public human label-free datasets and the incorporation
of the results into Expression Atlas as baseline studies.
Experimental Procedures
Datasets
As of September 2020, 3,930 public MS human
proteomics datasets were publicly available in PRIDE. We manually
filtered these 3,930 human datasets to select suitable datasets for
downstream analyses by applying several selection criteria. These
selection criteria for the datasets to be reanalyzed were (i) experimental
data from healthy tissues in baseline conditions coming from label-free
studies where no PTM-enrichment had been performed; (ii) experiments
performed on Thermo Fisher Scientific instruments (LTQ Orbitrap, LTQ
Orbitrap Elite, LTQ Orbitrap Velos, LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD, LTQ Orbitrap
XL ETD, Orbitrap Fusion, and Q-Exactive) because they represent the
larger proportion of the relevant public datasets available, and we
preferred to avoid the heterogeneity introduced by using data taken
from different MS vendors; (iii) availability of detailed sample metadata
in the original publication or after contacting the original submitters;
and (iv) our previous experience in the team working with some datasets,
which were discarded because they were not considered to be usable
(data not shown). As a result, 16 human datasets were obtained from
PRIDE (
Table
1
). Additionally,
8 datasets coming from human brain samples (also generated in Thermo
Fisher Scientific instruments) were downloaded from a large Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) dataset described in,
26
which
was available via the AMP-AD knowledge portal (
https://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org/
). Due to ethical issues, the AD datasets from the AMP-AD knowledge
portal are available under a controlled access agreement (i.e., data
made available only to approved users of the data included in the
AMP-AD knowledge portal) and were downloaded after obtaining the required
authorization.
Table 1
List of Proteomics Datasets that were
Reanalyzed
a
Dataset identifiers starting with
“PXD” come from the PRIDE database, and those identifiers
starting by “syn” come from the AMP-AD knowledge portal.
b
Only normal samples within this
dataset are reported in this study. However, results from both normal
and disease samples are available in Expression Atlas. Unique protein
sample batches available in any given dataset are considered as individual
samples (e.g., dataset E-PROT-34 (PXD004143) consists of four experiment
batches, where materials from two donors are each digested with LysC
and trypsin, and therefore these four unique batches are considered
as four different samples).
c
Numbers after post-processing. The
proteomics results in Expression Atlas can be accessed using the link:
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments/E-PROT-XX/Results
, where XX should be replaced by the E-PROT accession number shown
in the table. The raw proteomics datasets in PRIDE can be accessed
using the link:
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXDxxxxxx
, where PXDxxxxxx should be replaced by the PRIDE dataset identifier
shown in the table.
The sample and experimental metadata were manually curated from
their respective publications or by contacting the original authors/submitters.
Metadata was annotated using Annotare
27
and stored using the investigation description format (IDF) and
sample and data relationship format (SDRF) file formats required for
their integration in Expression Atlas. The IDF includes an overview
of the experimental design, including the experimental factors, protocols,
publication information, and contact information. The SDRF file includes
sample metadata and describes the relationship between various sample
characteristics and the data files included in the dataset.
In addition to the quantification of proteins in healthy tissues
representing the baseline conditions described in this study, we also
analyzed samples in the same datasets that were from non-healthy/non-normal
samples, which were included in the same datasets (which are not discussed
in this article, but the results are also available in Expression
Atlas). The selected datasets are listed in
Table
1
, including the original dataset identifiers,
tissues and organs included, number of MS runs, and number of samples.
The 24 datasets sum up a total of 498 samples from 67 different tissues
classified in 31 organs.
Proteomics Raw Data Processing
Datasets were analyzed
separately using the same software and search database. Peptide/protein
identification and protein quantification were performed using MaxQuant
28
,
29
(version 1.6.3.4) on a high-performance Linux computing cluster.
The input parameters for each dataset, such as MS1 and MS2 tolerances,
digestive enzymes, and fixed and variable modifications, were set
as described in their respective publications, together with two missed
cleavage sites. PSM (peptide spectrum match) and protein FDR (false
discovery rate) levels were set at 1%. Other MaxQuant parameter settings
were left as defaults: maximum number of modifications per peptide:
5, minimum peptide length: 7, maximum peptide mass: 4,600 Da. For
a match between runs, the minimum match time window was set to 0.7
s, and the minimum retention time alignment window was set to 20 s.
The MaxQuant parameter files are available for download from Expression
Atlas. The UniProt human reference proteome release-2019_05 (including
isoforms and 95,915 sequences) was used as the target sequence database.
The inbuilt MaxQuant contaminant database was used, and the decoy
database was generated using MaxQuant at the time of the analysis
(on-the-fly) by reversing the input database sequences after the respective
enzymatic cleavage. The datasets were run in a multithreading mode
with a maximum of 60 threads and 300 GB of RAM per dataset.
Post-Processing
The results coming from MaxQuant for
each dataset were further processed downstream to remove potential
contaminants, decoys, and protein groups, which had fewer than 2 PSMs.
The protein intensities were normalized using the fraction of total
(FOT) method, wherein each protein’s “iBAQ” intensity
value is scaled to the total amount of signal in a given MS run and
transformed to parts per billion (ppb).
The bioconductor package “mygene”
30
was used to assign Ensembl gene identifiers/annotations
to the protein groups by mapping the “majority protein identifiers”
within each protein group. This step is required for integration into
Expression Atlas because, at present, all abundance values have to
be in the same reference system to be integrated. The protein groups,
whose protein identifiers were mapped to multiple Ensembl gene IDs,
were not integrated into Expression Atlas but are available in Supporting
Table S1
. In the case of a protein group containing
isoforms from the same gene, these mapped to a single unique Ensembl
gene ID and were not filtered out. In cases where two or more protein
groups mapped to the same Ensembl gene ID, their median intensity
values were considered. The parent genes, to which different protein
groups were mapped, are equivalent to “canonical proteins”
in UniProt (
https://www.uniprot.org/help/canonical_and_isoforms
), and therefore, the term protein abundance is used to describe
the protein abundance of the canonical protein throughout the article.
Integration into Expression Atlas
The calculated canonical
protein abundances (mapped as genes), validated SDRF files, and summary
files detailing the quality of post-processing were integrated into
Expression Atlas (release 37, March 2021) as proteomics baseline experiments
(E-PROT identifiers are available in
Table
1
).
Protein Abundance Comparison Across Datasets
Since
datasets were analyzed separately, the protein abundances, available
in ppb values within each dataset, were converted into ranked bins
for comparison of abundances across datasets. The normalized protein
abundances per MS run, as described above, were ranked and grouped
into five bins, wherein proteins with the lowest protein abundance
values were in bin 1 and those with the highest abundance values were
in bin 5. Additionally, distinct tissue regions or organs within a
dataset were grouped into batches and binned separately. In this study,
“tissue” is defined as a distinct functional or structural
region within an “organ”. For example, the corpus callosum,
anterior temporal lobe, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were defined
as tissues that are part of the brain (organ), and similarly, the
left ventricle, aorta, and tricuspid valve are defined as tissues
in the heart (organ).
During the rank-bin transformation, if
a protein was not detected in any of the samples within a batch, we
did not assign it a bin value but annotated it as an NA (corresponding
to not detected) value instead. However, if a protein was not detected
in some samples of the batch but had protein abundance values in other
samples within the batch, we assigned the lowest bin value 1 to those
samples in that batch that were undetected. For example, in a dataset
comprising tissue samples from the brain, all samples from tissue
regions such as the corpus callosum were grouped into a batch, and
the ppb abundances were transformed into bins. If any of the samples
within a batch had no abundance values for a protein, they were marked
as NA. If some samples within the batch had missing abundance values,
the missing abundance values of those samples for that protein were
assigned the bin value 1. Binned abundances of those proteins that
were detected in at least 50% of the samples in the heart and brain
datasets were selected for PCA (principal component analysis). To
compare which normalization methods performed better at removing batch
effects, the iBAQ protein abundances were also normalized using the
ComBat
31
and Limma
32
methods. PCA was performed in R using the Stats package. Pearson’s
correlation coefficient for all samples was calculated on the basis
of pairwise complete observations of bin-transformed iBAQ values in
R. Samples were hierarchically clustered on columns and rows using
Euclidean distances.
Comparison of the Results with the Protein Abundance Values
from the Human Protein Atlas and ProteomicsDB
Results from
our analysis were compared with protein abundance data available at
the HPA. Abundance profiles of proteins in normal human tissues were
downloaded from HPA version 21.0. Protein abundance with reliability
scores labeled as “uncertain” were not considered in
the comparison. For the purposes of easing the comparison and computing
correlation, the categorical protein abundance levels in data downloaded
from the HPA were assigned numerical values closely matching the protein
abundance bins used in our analysis. Protein abundance levels annotated
as “low”, “medium”, and “high”
were assigned values 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The level annotated
as “not detected” was assigned NA, and levels annotated
as “ascending”, “descending”, and “not
representative” were all assigned a value of 1. For the purpose
of this comparison, we re-binned our protein abundance data into just
three categories: bins 1, 2, and 3, representing low, medium, and
high abundances, respectively. The “randomized edit distance
difference” was calculated across all pairs of organs included
in this study and HPA. The “randomized edit distance difference”
is the difference between the “true edit distance” and
the “randomized edit distance” of protein abundance
bins. Randomized edit distance difference = mean(random edit distance
1–
n
– true edit distance
1–
n
). The “true edit distance”
of a protein was computed as the absolute difference between the protein
abundance bins of both pairs. The “randomized edit distance”
is calculated as the mean of the absolute difference between the bin
value of pair 1 and the randomized bin value of pair 2, after sampling
it 10 times, that is, the randomized edit distance = mean (
)]). This was done using the base
R
package.
Normalized protein intensities from ProteomicsDB
33
were queried for organs that were common in
our study (31 organs). Values were obtained using the ProteomicsDB
application programming interface. For different tissue samples, we
aggregated the normalized intensities using the median of their respective
organs. The intensities were log2 normalized and compared.
Comparison of Label-free Protein Abundances with Protein Abundances
Generated Using a TMT Approach
The protein abundances calculated
across various baseline human organs/tissues using the TMT-labeling
method were obtained from
3
(
Supporting file
“NIHMS1624446-supplement-2”,
sheet: “C protein normalized abundance”). Protein abundances
of the respective organs measured across different TMT channels and
runs were aggregated using the median and log2 transformed. Different
tissue samples from the esophagus, heart, brain, and colon were aggregated
into their respective organs. Pearson’s correlation was calculated
in
R
.
Organ-Specific Expression Profile Analysis
To investigate
the organ-specific protein-based abundance profile, we carried out
a modification of the classification scheme done by Uhlén et
al
.
4
Briefly, each of
the 13,070 canonical proteins that were mapped from the protein groups
was classified into one of three categories based on the bin levels
in 31 organs: (1) “organ-enriched”: one unique organ
with bin values twofold higher than the mean bin value across all
organs; (2) “group enriched”: a group of 2–7
organs with bin values twofold higher than the mean bin value across
all organs; and (3) “mixed”: the remaining canonical
proteins that are not part of the above two categories.
Enriched
gene ontology (GO) term analysis was performed by means of the over-representation
test, combining the “organ-enriched” and “group-enriched”
mapped gene lists for each organ. The computational analysis was carried
out in the
R
environment with the package clusterProfiler
34
version 3.16.1 using the function enrichGO()
for the GO over-representation test using the parent gene list of
all detected canonical proteins as the background set. Setting the
p
-value cut-off to 0.05 and the
q
-value
cut-off to 0.05. Additionally, reactome
35
pathway analysis was carried out by using mapped gene lists (indicated
by the protein groups) and running pathway topology and over-representation
analysis. First, the “project to human” option was selected
with the combining list of “organ-enriched” and “group-enriched”
entities. Afterward, those pathways with a
p
-value
>0.05 were filtered out. The hierarchical clustering was done based
on the distances calculated on the p-values using the ggdendro package
in
R
.
Results
Human Baseline Proteomics Datasets
We manually selected
24 label-free publicly available human proteomics datasets coming
from PRIDE and from the AMP-AD knowledge portal databases (
Table
1
). These datasets
were selected to represent baseline conditions and therefore included
samples annotated as healthy or normal from a wide range of biological
tissues. The datasets were restricted to include those label-free
datasets generated on Thermo Fisher Scientific Instruments. See more
details about dataset selection in the “Methods” section.
In total, the aggregated datasets represent 67 healthy tissues,
corresponding to 3,119 MS runs covering 498 samples, coming from 489
individuals. In this study, “tissue” is defined as a
distinct functional or structural region within an “organ”.
The cumulative CPU time used for the reanalyses was approximately
2,750 h or 114 calendar days. The numbers of protein groups, peptides,
and unique peptides identified and protein coverage in each dataset
are shown in
Table
1
.
The resulting protein abundances of all samples have been made
available in Expression Atlas. These “proteomics baseline”
quantification results can be viewed as abundance heatmaps against
the gene symbols, and the quantification matrices can be downloaded
as text files together with annotated metadata of donor samples, experimental
parameters, and a summary file describing the analysis with representative
charts (quality assessment) summarizing the output of the post-processed
samples. The protocol for data reanalysis is summarized in
Figure
1
.
Figure 1
Overview of the study design and reanalysis pipeline. QA: Quality
assessment. Reprinted (Adapted or Reprinted in part) with permission
from .
20
Copyright 2022 EMBL-EBI.
Protein Coverage Across Samples
For simplicity of comparison,
we broadly grouped 67 tissues into 31 major types of organs. As explained
in “Methods”, we defined “tissue” as a
distinct functional or structural region within an “organ”.
For example, the corpus callosum, anterior temporal lobe, and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex were all defined as tissues in the brain (which
is the “organ”). After post-processing the output files
from MaxQuant, 11,653 protein groups (36.3% of identified protein
groups across all datasets) were uniquely present in only one organ
and 380 protein groups (1.2%) were ubiquitously observed (Supporting
Table S2
). This does not imply that these proteins
are unique to these organs. Merely, this is the outcome considering
the selected datasets.
We mapped the isoforms in the protein
groups to their respective parent gene names, which we will use as
equivalent to “canonical proteins” in UniProt (see “Methods”)
from now on in the article. Overall, 13,070 different genes were mapped
from protein identifiers in the protein groups. We denote the term
“protein abundance” to mean “canonical protein
abundance” from here on. We then estimated the number of proteins
identified across organs, which indicated that greater than 70% of
all canonical proteins were present in a majority of organs (
Figure
2
A,C). We also observed
the highest numbers of common proteins in samples from the tonsil
(92.2%) and brain (90.9%) and the lowest numbers in samples from the
umbilical artery (7.2%).
Figure 2
(A) Number of canonical proteins identified across different organs.
The number within the parenthesis indicates the number of samples.
(B) Range of normalized iBAQ protein abundances across different organs.
The number within the parenthesis indicates the number of samples.
In panels (A) and (B), the term heart is used in a broader sense to
mean the cardiovascular system. (C) Canonical proteins identified
across different datasets. The number within the parenthesis indicates
the number of unique tissues in the dataset. (D) Range of normalized
iBAQ protein abundances across different datasets. The number within
the parenthesis indicates the number of unique tissues in the dataset.
(E) Comparison of total spectral data with the number of canonical
proteins identified in each dataset and organ. (F) Distribution of
canonical proteins identified across organs.
The higher number of proteins identified in the brain could be
attributed to the greater representation of samples (339 samples out
of 498, 68.0%). However, tonsils were represented only by seven samples,
all of which were derived from one dataset (PXD010154). It is worth
noting that the sample preparation protocol for the tonsil samples
employed seven different proteases (trypsin, LysC, ArgC, GluC, AspN,
LysN, and chymotrypsin) for tissue digestion,
36
thus significantly increasing its peptide coverage.
36
The sample size of the umbilical artery, which showed significantly
lower protein coverage than other organs, was 10 samples.
The largest number of canonical proteins were identified in dataset
PXD010154 (
Figure
2
C), which comprises numerous tissue samples (31 tissues) including
samples from tonsils. The dynamic range of protein abundances in all
organs is shown in
Figure
2
B. On the other hand, protein abundances among datasets showed
that PXD010154 had the lowest median protein abundances (
Figure
2
D). We also compared
the quantity of spectral data from various organs and datasets with
the number of canonical proteins identified in them to detect any
organ or dataset that showed enrichment of proteins relative to the
amount of data. We observed a linear relation between the number of
proteins identified and the amount of spectral data present in the
organ samples or datasets (
Figure
2
E).
Distribution of Canonical Protein Identifications per Organ
We observed that 37.1% (4,853) of the identified canonical proteins
were expressed in 30 different organs (
Figure
2
F). The low number of proteins identified
in umbilical artery (933) samples greatly influenced the protein distribution.
As a result, 7.0% (917) of all identified canonical proteins were
present in all 31 organs, whereas 4.2% (565) of the identified canonical
proteins were uniquely present in one organ. However, it is important
to highlight that the list of concrete canonical proteins that were
detected in just one organ should be taken with caution since the
list is subjected to an inflated FDR due to the accumulation of false
positives when analyzing the datasets separately. However, this should
not be an issue in the case of proteins detected across five datasets
or more since the number of commonly detected decoy protein hits enabled
us to calculate a protein FDR less than 1% (
Figure S1
in Supporting Figures).
Protein Abundance Comparison Across Organs
Next, we
compared the protein abundances to see how proteins compared across
different organs. Inter-dataset batch effects make comparisons challenging.
We transformed the normalized iBAQ intensities into ranked bins as
explained in “Methods”. The bin-transformed protein
abundances in all organs are provided in Supporting
Table S3
.
To compare protein abundance across all organs,
a pairwise Pearson correlation coefficient of binned protein abundances
was calculated across 498 samples (
Figure
3
). We observed a good correlation of protein
abundance within the brain (median
R
2
=
0.61) and cardiovascular system (median
R
2
= 0.41) samples, which represent the two organ groups with the largest
number of samples. We tested the effectiveness of various normalization
methods in reducing batch effects by performing a PCA on samples coming
from the cardiovascular system and brain datasets. The analyzed brain
and cardiovascular system samples constituted the largest numbers
in the aggregated dataset, including 19 and 3 datasets, respectively.
First, we performed PCA on the normalized iBAQ values, wherein the
brain samples did not cluster either by tissues or by datasets. However,
for cardiovascular system samples, we observed clustering of samples
by datasets and not by tissue type (
Figure S2
in Supporting Figures). We then tested the ComBat and Limma normalization
methods on iBAQ values, which neither showed clustering of samples
by tissues nor by datasets for both cardiovascular system and brain
samples (
Figures S3 and S4
in Supporting
Figures).
Figure 3
Heatmap of pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients across all
samples. The color on the heatmap represents the correlation coefficient,
which was calculated using the bin-transformed iBAQ values. The samples
are hierarchically clustered on columns and rows using Euclidean distances.
The clusters composed of the brain and cardiovascular system (heart)
samples are highlighted with black borders. The abbreviations used
in the organs’ header are B: brain, C: colon, H: heart, L:
liver, O: ovary, and P: pancreas.
We then decided to use the bin-transformed protein abundances (see
“Methods”). First, we observed that brain samples were
clustered together according to their tissue type (
Figure
4
A). All brain tissue samples,
except those coming from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC),
were part of individual datasets. The DLPFC samples were derived from
six separate datasets, of which five of them were part of the Consensus
Brain Protein Coexpression study.
26
The
DLPFC samples clustered into two groups: a large group that comprised
samples from the Consensus Protein Coexpression study and a smaller
cluster with samples from dataset PXD004143 (
Figure
4
B), indicating that there was still a residual
batch effect.
Figure 4
(A) PCA of brain samples colored by the tissue types. (B) PCA of
brain samples colored by their respective dataset identifiers. (C)
PCA of cardiovascular system (heart) samples colored by the tissue
types. (D) PCA of cardiovascular system (heart) samples colored by
their respective dataset identifiers. The numbers in parenthesis indicate
the number of datasets for each tissue. Binned values of canonical
proteins quantified in at least 50% of the samples were used to perform
the PCA.
Similarly, we observed cardiovascular system samples clustered
according to their tissue types (
Figure
4
C). All cardiovascular system samples except
those coming from the left ventricle were part of an individual dataset.
Interestingly, we observed three major clusters: one wherein all valve
samples (aortic valve, mitral valve, pulmonary valve, and tricuspid
valve) were clustered together. A second cluster was formed where
the samples from the ventricles and atriums were clustered in a large
group together with other cardiovascular system samples. Finally,
left ventricle samples from dataset PXD008934 (
Figure
4
D) formed a separate cluster, indicating
that there were still batch effects, which were not completely removed.
Comparison of Protein Abundance Values with Previous Studies
We first compared the protein abundances resulting from our reanalysis
with those reported in the original publications. By comparing the
number of protein groups or genes identified in individual datasets,
we observed that the differences between our analysis and the original
published results ranged from as low as 1.3% (E-PROT-53, dataset syn7204174)
to as high as 43.2% (E-PROT-36, dataset PXD012755). Similarly, the
difference at the level of identified peptides ranged from a minimum
of 0.29% (E-PROT-33, dataset PXD005819) to a maximum of 57.2% (E-PROT-36,
dataset PXD012755) (Supporting
Table S4
). These differences in overall numbers could be due to various factors,
including the target protein sequence database, the analysis software,
and the version used.
We then compared our results with protein
abundance data available in ProteomicsDB 33 and found a good correlation
in abundance across various organs. As it can be seen in
Figure S5
in Supporting Figures, the highest
correlation was found in the salivary gland (
R
2
= 0.75) and the lowest one in the ovary (
R
2
= 0.52). However, it should be noted that one of the
datasets included in our analysis (dataset PXD010154) is also included
in ProteomicsDB. Additionally, we also made a comparison between our
protein abundance results and those found in a large study across
multiple human organs using TMT-labeling method 3.
Figure S6
in Supporting Figures shows the Pearson’s
correlation of protein abundances between both studies, which was
generally lower than in the case of ProteomicsDB data, ranging from
0.22 to 0.48 across various organs.
In addition, we compared our results with protein abundances computed
using antibody-based methods, available in the Human Protein Atlas
(HPA). First, we performed a qualitative analysis in which we compared
the number of proteins identified in matching organs in our analysis
with those identified in the HPA. There were 30 organs that were common
between both studies (except for the umbilical artery, which was not
available in HPA). The comparison results are shown in
Figure S7
in Supporting Figures. Our analysis
shows that an average of 43.7% of all proteins identified in HPA were
also present in our aggregated dataset, with the highest number of
commonly identified proteins found in the brain (50.4%) and the lowest
number of common proteins was found in adipose tissue (27.2%). On
the other hand, an average of 40.4% of proteins were only identified
in our analysis and were not present in the results analyzed in HPA.
The largest and the lowest number of proteins that were identified
only in our analysis were in adipose tissue (61.6%) and in testes
(30.2%), respectively. Lastly, an average of 15.8% of the proteins
were exclusive to HPA and not identified across any organs in our
analysis. Of these proteins, the largest HPA-exclusive group was present
in the vermiform appendix (21.6%), and the lowest was found in the
adrenal gland (8.9%).
We then compared protein abundances by first transforming the abundances
in HPA into numerical bins. Protein abundance data from HPA are annotated
in three categorical groups as “low”, “medium,”
and “high”, which we converted into three numerical
bins 1, 2, and 3, respectively. For the purpose of this comparison,
we re-binned our protein abundance data into just three categories:
bins 1, 2, and 3, representing low, medium, and high abundances, respectively
(see “Methods”). To identify the difference between
noise and signal, we calculated the randomized edit distance difference
metric across all organs between the two studies (see Methods). The
higher “randomized edit distance difference” indicates
that there is a difference between signal and random noise. The randomized
edit distance difference matrix (
Figure S8
in Supporting Figures) shows that the randomized edit distance difference
between organs within HPA is low (average randomized edit distance
difference = 0.18) compared to that of the organs within our study
(average randomized edit distance difference = 0.43). This seems to
suggest that the overall protein abundances generated in this study
are less noisy than the abundance data available in HPA.
Organ-Elevated Proteome and the Over-Representative Biological
Processes
As explained in “Methods”, according
to their abundances, canonical proteins were divided in three different
groups according to their organ specificity: “organ-enriched”,
“group-enriched,” and “mixed” (see Supporting
Table S5
). We considered elevated canonical proteins,
which were classified as an “organ-enriched” or “group-enriched”
instead of the “mixed” group. The analysis (
Figure
5
A) showed that, on
average, 3.8% of the total elevated canonical proteins were organ
group-specific. The highest ratio was found in the adrenal gland (9.3%),
brain (7.5%), and liver (7.1%), and the lowest ratio was found in
the gall bladder (2.3%) and umbilical artery (0.1%). In addition,
0.4% of the total canonical proteins were uniquely organ enriched.
The highest ratio was found in the brain (3.8%), cardiovascular system
(1.4%), and liver (0.5%), and the lowest ratio (∼0.1%) was
found in the tonsil and uterine endometrium.
Figure 5
(A) Analysis of organ-specific canonical proteins. The analysis
comprises the number of canonical proteins found in 31 organs, classified
in three groups: “organ-enriched”, “group-enriched”,
and “group mixed”. (B) Pathway analysis of the over-represented
canonical proteins, showing the statistically significant representative
pathways (
p
-value <0.05) in 31 organs. In panels
(A) and (B), the term heart is used in a broader sense to mean the
cardiovascular system.
Then, we performed a gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using
the GO terms related to biological processes for those canonical proteins
that were “organ-enriched” and “group-enriched”,
as shown in
Table
2
. As a summary, 358 GO terms were found to be statistically significant
across all organs (see Supporting
Table S6
). The terms found were in agreement with the known functions of
the respective organs. The brain had the largest number of “organ-enriched”
canonical proteins (457), and among the biological processes associated
with them stand out the regulatory function on membrane potential
(GO:0042391), neurotransmitter transport (GO:0006836), modulation
of chemical synaptic transmission (GO:0050804), regulation of
trans
-synaptic signaling (GO:0099177), and potassium ion
transport (GO:0006813). The second organ with a greater number of
“organ-enriched” canonical proteins was the cardiovascular
system (137). The enriched biological processes involved were related
to striated muscle cell differentiation (GO:0051146), sarcomere organization
(GO:0045214), muscle structure development (GO:0061061), and regulation
of myotube differentiation (GO:0010830). As expected, there were common
GO terms that were shared between the organs, such as detoxification
of inorganic compounds (GO:0061687) in the liver and kidneys, import
across the plasma membrane (GO:0098739) in the kidney, brain, and
umbilical artery, and processes involved in tissues with high cell
division turnover like chromosome segregation (GO:0007059) in the
bone marrow and testis.
Table 2
Analysis of the GO Terms for Each
Organ Using the Elevated Organ-Specific Canonical Proteins and Group-Specific
Ones, as Described in the “Methods” Section
organ
GO ID
description
adjusted
p
-value
adrenal gland
GO:0031649
heat generation
7.94 × 10
–4
bone marrow
GO:0034080
CENP-A containing nucleosome assembly
1.49 × 10
–3
brain
GO:0042391
regulation of membrane potential
1.71 × 10
–11
fallopian tube oviduct
GO:0044782
cilium organization
2.88 × 10
–48
gallbladder
GO:0017158
regulation of calcium ion-dependent exocytosis
1.17 × 10
–2
cardiovascular system (heart)
GO:0051146
striated muscle cell differentiation
9.58 × 10
–6
kidney
GO:0046942
carboxylic acid transport
4.81 × 10
–16
liver
GO:0097501
stress response to metal
ion
1.08 × 10
–3
lung
GO:0003002
regionalization
8.83 × 10
–3
lymph node
GO:0002250
adaptive immune response
1.93 × 10
–4
ovary
GO:0008544
epidermis development
8.42 × 10
–7
placenta
GO:0044706
multi-multicellular organism process
4.84 × 10
–3
testis
GO:0048232
male gamete generation
5.00 × 10
–24
thyroid
GO:0098742
cell–cell adhesion via plasma-membrane adhesion
molecules
1.34 × 10
–2
tonsil
GO:0031424
keratinization
3.20 × 10
–5
umbilical artery
GO:0001937
negative regulation of endothelial
cell proliferation
1.75 × 10
–3
Next, we performed a pathway-enrichment analysis using reactome
35
to analyze canonical proteins that were “organ-enriched”
and “group-enriched” (see Supporting
Table S7
). The heatmap (
Figure
5
B) shows statistically significant pathways (
p
-value <0.05) across the organs. The total number of
pathways found in all the organs was 928, and the largest number of
pathways was found in the brain with 67 pathways. The pathways found
were consistent with the GO analysis and with the expected function
in each organ. We observed a “cell cycle’ cluster of
over-represented pathways related to the bone marrow and testis (R-HSA-1640170,
R-HSA-69620, R-HSA-73886, R-HSA-2500257, and R-HSA-69618), expected
in high cell turnover tissues, the digestion pathway (R-HSA-192456)
in the pancreas and stomach, a neuronal system cluster of pathways
(R-HSA-112316) in the brain, and pathways related to the transport
of small molecules (R-HSA-382551, R-HSA-425407, R-HSA-425393, and
R-HSA-425366) in the kidneys.
Integration of Results into Expression Atlas
Protein
abundance results from label-free experiments across various tissues
were integrated into Expression Atlas. The abundances of each protein
are represented in terms of their canonical gene symbols since Expression
Atlas is designed as a gene-centric resource. Proteomics results can
be accessed using the link
www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments/E-PROT-xx/Downloads
(replacing xx with the corresponding identifier for each dataset).
For each dataset, the raw, unprocessed MaxQuant output files (proteinGroups.txt)
are made available to download together with the input experimental
parameters (mqpar.xml) to MaxQuant, as well as the metadata annotation
file of each sample. We also provide a summary of the quality assessment
of the results. Supporting
Figures S9–S12
provide a brief manual on how to access proteomics data in Expression
Atlas.
Discussion
We here include a combined analysis of human baseline proteomics
datasets representing baseline protein abundance across 67 healthy
tissues grouped in 31 organs. This type of study has been enabled
by the large amount of data in the public domain, as the proteomics
community is now embracing open data policies. The large-scale availability
of MS data in public databases such as PRIDE enables integrated metaanalyses
of proteomics data covering a wide array of tissues and biological
conditions. The main aim of our study was to provide a system-wide
baseline protein abundance catalog across various tissues and organs,
which could be used as a reference (especially to those non-experts
in proteomics) and help to reduce redundant efforts of similar computationally
expensive reanalyses.
Unlike what was done in one previous study performed by us,
22
and analogously to what we did with a more recent
study performed using data generated from baseline rat and mouse tissues,
23
here we analyzed each dataset separately using
the same software and the same search protein sequence database. The
disadvantage of this approach is that the FDR statistical thresholds
are applied at a dataset level and not to all datasets together as
a whole, with the potential accumulation of false positives across
datasets. However, this does not represent an issue in the case of
proteins detected in several datasets (in this particular study, at
least five datasets will provide a protein FDR of less than 1%,
Figure S1
in Supporting Figures), since the number
of commonly detected false positives is reduced in parallel with the
increase in the number of common datasets where a given protein is
detected. This means that proteins that are only detected in a small
number of datasets could potentially be false positives (considering
the applied 1% FDR at the protein level), but that does not mean that
they are. At that point, researchers should seek confirmation of the
existence of the protein (if that is their goal) via alternative sources
as well. Different reanalyses of some of the datasets used in this
study, with different FDR calculation methods, have been published
independently.
56
,
57
In our view, the objective of integrating quantitative proteomics
information with other omics data types (in this case, transcriptomics)
in resources used by non-proteomics researchers such as Expression
Atlas is only feasible in a sustainable manner using a dataset per
dataset analysis approach, at least at present. This enables that
(i) the computing requirements for the reanalyses are realistic, given
the large volume of files included in the potentially very large-combined
datasets; (ii) interesting additional datasets could be added at a
different time point without having to reanalyze all datasets together
again; (iii) future updates in the results are more feasible to perform;
and (iv) (semi)-automation of the reanalyses is achievable, making
these efforts more sustainable again. As mentioned above, we followed
this same overall approach in the recent study that we performed in
mouse and rat tissues in baseline conditions.
23
Additionally, we compared our results with previous analogous studies
performed in baseline tissues using MS and also the antibody-based
data available in the HPA. These comparisons generated quite different
results depending on each study.
One of the major bottlenecks was, as reported before, the curation
of dataset metadata, consisting of mapping files to samples and biological
conditions. Detailed sample and donor metadata is crucial for result
reproducibility, and we found detailed metadata available in PRIDE
for just a handful of datasets. The required information was either
inferred or requested by contacting the respective study’s
authors. If no responses were obtained, such datasets could not be
considered for the reanalysis. Therefore, to aid the reproducibility
of results in the future, we need to improve the provision of metadata
by data submitters. A format to enable that has been developed (the
SDRF-Proteomics format, as part of the new MAGE-TAB-Proteomics format),
which can be submitted optionally to PRIDE.
58
We expect that it will become increasingly used for data submissions
to PRIDE once the right tooling is available and submitters have been
educated appropriately.
Another one of the major challenges in the reanalysis of a large
number of proteomics datasets is the integration of results from different
datasets since batch effects are inevitable. We used a rank-binned
normalization of abundances, which transformed protein abundances
across datasets and samples to bins of 1 to 5. This approach is useful
for reducing batch effects, although we acknowledge that there is
also a loss of signal through this transformation. We also acknowledge
that this method is not ideal in all circumstances, but in our view,
it generally works better when compared to popular methods to reduce
batch effects, such as ComBat and Limma. Since our method computes
protein abundances in terms of their canonical protein and gene identifiers,
we acknowledge that using the median of intensities to aggregate abundances
over protein groups with isoforms coming from the same canonical protein
may not represent the total sum of all proteins and may influence
ranking during binning.
Although the combined dataset contains a higher representation
of particular tissues (especially brain), we believe it represents
the current state of the art with regard to public baseline human
proteomics studies carried out in tissues. The analysis search strategy
used in this study focused only on detecting known coding protein
sequences using the UniProt reference proteome, in the same way as
performed in the original studies. Therefore, it was not possible
to detect any single amino acid variants or equivalent isobaric combinations
involving PTMs. However, the effect of this limitation on the analysis
should, in our view, be relatively small because the type of samples
used in this study (healthy tissues) did not involve, for example,
tumor samples. The availability of the results through Expression
Atlas enables the integration of mRNA and proteomics abundance information,
offering an interface for researchers to access this type of information.
One possible next step will be the integration of datasets in the
differential part of Expression Atlas. The work required there would
be more complex at different levels, including the downstream statistical
differential analysis. Also, the availability of mapping between the
channels (e.g., in TMT and SILAC experiments) and samples is very
rare at present. In parallel, work has also started on integrating
in Expression Atlas quantitative proteomics data generated using data
independent acquisition (DIA) approaches.
59
The generated baseline protein abundance data can be used for different
purposes. For instance, quantitative proteomics data can be used for
the generation of co-expression networks and/or the inference of protein
complexes. Protein abundance data could also be used to potentially
refine the recently developed AlphaFold-based protein complex predictions.
60
Additionally, it is possible to use artificial
intelligence approaches to impute protein abundance values using calculated
abundance values as training data.
61
It
would also be possible to perform expression correlation studies between
the gene and protein expression information. However, this type of
study can only be performed optimally if the same samples are analyzed
by both techniques, as reported in the original publication for dataset
PXD010154
36
. It should also be highlighted that a growing
number of studies are using non-MS-based proteomics techniques, such
as the use of affinity reagents (e.g., the Olink and SomaLogic platforms),
due to the increased throughput that they can provide. Initial studies
are being performed to compare these with MS approaches.
In conclusion, the results presented here represent a large-scale
meta-analysis of public human baseline proteomics datasets. We also
show the challenges in this kind of analysis, providing a roadmap
for such future studies.
Data Availability
Expression Atlas E-PROT identifiers and PRIDE and AMP-AD original
dataset identifiers are included in
Table
1
.