Introduction
Copper has unique catalytic properties
which make it essential
for living systems. In respiring eukaryotic cells, this d-block transition
metal helps catalyze the reduction of O
2
by cytochrome
c oxidase (COX) in the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM). The active
site of this respiratory complex includes a copper ion called Cu
B
which works in conjunction with a heme to bind and reduce
O
2
. Electrons used in reduction pass through the Cu
A
redox site also in COX.
Cytosolic copper ions derived
from nutrients are trafficked to
mitochondria and installed into the Cu
A
and Cu
B
sites during COX assembly. After copper ions enter the intermembrane
space (IMS), the trafficking pathway for delivery to these sites is
generally understood. COX17, a soluble 8 kDa copper-containing protein
in the IMS homologous to metallothioneins, transfers copper to chaperones
SCO1 and COX11.
1
−
5
SCO1 functions along with COA6 and SCO2 to install copper into Cu
A
,
6
,
7
whereas COX11 delivers copper to Cu
B
.
5
COX17 may also donate copper
to CCS1, the chaperone that installs copper into superoxide dismutase
1 (SOD1), which partially localizes a portion of which localizes to
the IMS.
8
By contrast, the pathway
of copper trafficking from the cytosol
to the IMS is uncertain. In the mid 1990s, Tzagoloff and co-workers
3
−
9
discovered that: (a) COX17 has dual localization, with ∼40%
in the cytosol and the remainder in the IMS, (b) mutations of COX17
inhibit COX assembly and cause a respiratory defect, (c) ΔCOX17
cells are rescued when grown in copper-supplemented media, and (d)
COX17 does not bind copper tightly enough to prevent dissociation
during purification. They concluded that COX17 traffics cytosolic
copper into the IMS for eventual delivery to COX.
However, COX17
was subsequently found to enter mitochondria through
the MIA40/ERV1 pathway
10
which requires
that all cysteine residues are reduced and that the protein is in
the apo-unfolded state.
11
Once in the IMS,
MIA40 oxidizes the twin Cx
9
C cysteines, forming two disulfide
bonds that prevent the protein from returning to the cytosol.
1
,
2
,
10
Morgan et al.
11
found that Zn
2+
ions bound to a Mia40 protein
substrate impeded entry into the IMS, suggesting that Cu
1+
ions bound to COX17 might do the same.
Also, Winge and co-workers
showed that COX17 tethered to the mitochondrial
IM (by fusing it with the SCO1 transmembrane domain) in an otherwise
COX17-free cell does not result in a respiratory defect or abolish
COX activity.
12
The COX17 chimera was not
detected in the cytosol nor were high copper concentrations in the
media required for normal respiratory activity. They concluded that
COX17 functions exclusively in the mitochondrial IMS and that it receives
copper from an unidentified chaperone.
Soon thereafter, Winge
and Cobine examined soluble mitochondrial
extracts (SMEs) using liquid chromatography.
13
,
14
They concluded that 85% of total mitochondrial copper is present
as a low-molecular-mass (LMM) complex in the matrix called Cu
L
. Although Cu
L
remains unidentified, it has been
characterized as a nonproteinaceous and anionic complex that is stable
to boiling and organic extractions. Its chromatographic apparent mass
was originally reported as 13 kDa, but later investigations imply
a lower mass more typical of mononuclear copper coordination complexes
with small organic ligands. Ligand L is reportedly fluorescent and
detectable in the cytosol.
15
IM proteins
PIC2 and MRS3 reportedly import Cu
L
into the matrix.
15
,
16
The Cu
L
pool is proposed to dynamically store cellular
copper and, once exported back into the IMS by an unknown transporter,
provide copper for COX and other copper-containing mitochondrial proteins.
17
The presence of labile copper in mitochondria
has been independently
verified.
18
,
19
Additionally, Cobine et al.
14
targeted SOD1 and metallothionein CRS5 to the matrix in
cells lacking the high-affinity plasma-membrane-bound copper importer
CTR1. This inhibited respiration and diminished the intensity of the
Cu
L
chromatography peaks in extracts from those cells.
The effect could be reversed by supplementing growth media with copper.
These results suggest that matrix-localized SOD1 and CRS5 apo-proteins
extracted copper from Cu
L
and that this inhibited COX metalation.
Our group has attempted to identify Cu
L
in mitochondria
by isolating the organelle, filtering SMEs through a 10 kDa cutoff
membrane, and then passing the flow-through solution (FTS) through
size-exclusion chromatography columns.
20
−
22
Unexpectedly, the major
detected copper species migrated with an apparent mass of ∼5000
Da. The chromatographic region in which LMM species migrated, defined
as having apparent masses between 200 and 2000 Da, exhibited only
minor-intensity Cu peaks, albeit with some batch-to-batch variation.
Copper species that migrated similarly to Cu5000 were recently observed
in FTSs from the cytosol and vacuoles.
23
,
24
The intensity
of such peaks in cytosol FTSs increased when cells were grown on copper-supplemented
media, and Cu5000 was absent in traces of cytosol FTSs from ΔCUP1
cells. These results, along with the apparent mass of Cu5000, supported
speculation that this species was metallothionein CUP1, a well-known
cytosolic protein.
In the current study, we used liquid chromatography
electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS) and liquid chromatography
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LC-ICP-MS) to demonstrate
that Cu5000 indeed arises from CUP1 and that this protein colocalizes
to the cytosol and IMS of mitochondria isolated from healthy respiring
WT yeast cells. Confocal fluorescence images of green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-labeled CUP1 suggest that copper-bound CUP1 does not
enter mitochondria through pores on the outer membrane (OM). Additionally,
CUP1 concentration within the mitochondria had an inverse relationship
with those of LMM Cu complexes, suggesting that CUP1 limits that metal
pool. Although the pathway by which CUP1 enters mitochondria and its
role within the organelle remain tentative, our results demand a fundamental
re-evaluation of mitochondrial copper metabolism.
Materials and Methods
Yeast Strains and Cell Culture
DTY WT (MATα trp1–l
gall metl3 can1 CUP1
S
ura3-50 Ade-His-) and CUP1Δ
(MATα trp1-l gall metl3 can1 CUP1
Δ
ura3-50
Ade-His-) cells
25
were received as a gift
from Dr. Dennis Thiele. BY4741 CUP1-1-GFP and CUP1-2-GFP clones were
acquired from the Yeast GFP Clone Collection (Thermo Scientific).
These cells, along with WT strains W303 (MATα ade2-1 his3-11,15
leu2-3,112 trp1-1 ura3-1) and BY4741 (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0
met15Δ0 ura3Δ0), were maintained as described.
26
Fifty mL precultures were inoculated with single
colonies taken from YPAD plates (20 g/L glucose, 10 g/L yeast extract,
20 g/L peptone, 100 mg/L adenine, and 10 g/L bactoagar) at 30 °C.
Precultures were transferred to larger volume cultures (1, 1.5, or
2 L) once the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) reached ∼1.
Transfers and isolations were conducted using exponentially growing
cells.
For cytosol isolations, W303 WT cells were cultured in
a 2.8 L baffled flask containing 2 L of MM, including 20 g/L glucose,
5 g/L ammonium sulfate, 1.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base without ammonium
sulfate or ferric chloride (MP Bio), 100 mg/L leucine, 50 mg/L adenine,
20 mg/L histidine, 20 mg/L uracil, 48 mg/L tryptophan, 40 μM
ferric citrate, and 50 μM copper sulfate. Flasks were swirled
at 180 rpm in an incubator (MaxQ 8000, Thermo Scientific) at 30 °C.
For isotopic enrichment studies, natural-abundance copper sulfate
was replaced with 50 μM copper(II) chloride of the indicated
isotope. Baffled flasks were soaked in 5% HNO
3
overnight
and rinsed with double distilled water. For mitochondrial isolations,
W303 WT cells were cultured in either 1.5 or 25 L of MM in which 30
mL/L glycerol and 10 mL/L ethanol replaced glucose. Larger volume
growths used a custom-built 24 L glass reactor with a titanium stir
paddle and tubing. Pressurized air was bubbled through the media.
For a comparison study of the effect of changing the media, mitochondria
were also isolated from W303 WT cells cultured in 1.5 L YPEG composed
of 30 mL/L glycerol, 10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, 100 mg/L
adenine, and 50 μM copper sulfate.
Due to poor growth
on MM, DTY cells were cultured in 2.8 L baffled
flasks containing 2 L of YPAD media including 20 g/L glucose, 10 g/L
yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, 100 mg/L adenine, and 50 μM copper
sulfate. BY4741 cells, which also grew poorly on MM, were cultured
in 2.8 L baffled flasks containing 1.5 L of respiring CSM media, including
30 mL/L glycerol, 0.64 g/L CSM-Leu-Trp (Sunrise Science), 1.7 g/L
yeast nitrogen base (without ammonium sulfate, ferric chloride, or
copper sulfate (MP Bio)), 5 g/L ammonium sulfate, 100 mg/L leucine,
50 mg/L adenine, 48 mg/L tryptophan, 40 μM ferric citrate, and
50 μM copper sulfate. For a comparison study, mitochondria were
isolated from DTY005 WT cells cultured in 1.5 L of CSM respiring media.
All cultures were grown aerobically. Initial centrifugation steps
to acquire initial whole cell pellets were also conducted aerobically.
20AA6.5 buffer (20 mM ammonium acetate pH 6.5) and SAA2 buffer (0.6
M sorbitol in 20AA6.5 were degassed on a Schenk line and imported
into a refrigerated glovebox (Mbraun Labmaster 130, 5 °C, <5
ppm O
2
). Isolations were conducted in a glovebox, taken
out sealed for centrifugation steps, and then brought back into the
glovebox.
Cytosol Isolation
Cytosol was isolated as described
23
with minor modifications. When 2 L cell cultures
reached 0.6 < OD600 < 0.8, they were spun by centrifugation
at 5000 ×
g
for 5 min in a Sorvall Lynx 6000
centrifuge (Thermo Scientific), resuspended in deionized water (5
mL water per g cells, typically 4 g cells), and recentrifuged. Water
washing was performed three times. Pelleted cells were brought into
the glovebox preceding the third rinse’s removal and resuspended
in 20AA6.5, 10 mM DTT (5 mL/g cells). The suspension was agitated
at 180 rpm at 30 °C in an incubator shaker and then pelleted
at 4000 ×
g
for 6 min. The supernatant was discarded,
and the pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of SAA2 buffer per g cells.
A 0.2 M stock of PMSF (Sigma) was prepared in ethanol, and an aliquot
was added to the suspension (10 mM, final). Zymolyase (Amsbio 120493-1)
was added to the suspension (1 mg (100 KU) per g cells). Aliquots
were taken before and after zymolyase addition to monitor cell wall
digestion using OD600. The suspension was agitated in the 30 °C
incubator shaker until OD600 had declined to <30% of its original
value. The spheroplasts were spun by centrifugation at 1800 ×
g
for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The spheroplasts
were then resuspended in SAA2 buffer, 10 mM PMSF, 6 mL/g according
to the original pellet mass (typically 24 mL of SAA2 buffer for 4
g cells). The spheroplast suspension was homogenized in a 40 mL capacity
Dounce tissue grinder (Kimble, glass pestle A with clearance 0.0030–0.0060
inches), in 15 mL aliquots and 10 strokes per aliquot. Homogenates
were combined and centrifuged at 1000 ×
g
for
15 min. The supernatant was removed and then centrifuged at 15000
×
g
for 30 min. The resulting supernatant was
removed and centrifuged at 112,000 ×
g
for 60
min. Any detectable lipid layer was removed from the top of the supernatant,
and the supernatant was then centrifuged at 185,000 ×
g
for 150 min. The resulting supernatant, defined as cytosol,
was filtered through either a 10 kDa cutoff filter (Amicon Ultra 2
mL Centrifugal filter) by centrifugation at 3858 ×
g
for 1 h or a 0.2 μm pore syringe filter (Titan3 regenerated
cellulose, Thermo Scientific). For the study incubating the cytosol
with varying equivalents of BCS, CUP1 concentration was calculated
from the integrated chromatographic peak. Mixtures were incubated
overnight in the glovebox.
Large-scale lysates were prepared
from 25 L bioreactor cultures. W303 WT cells were cultured in glucose-based
MM. Cells were centrifuged at 5000 ×
g
for 5
min. The pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of 20 mM ammonium acetate
+10 mM DTT per g cells. The suspension was agitated in the incubator
shaker and then pelleted at 4000 ×
g
for 6 min.
Cells were resuspended in 5 mL of SAA2 buffer and treated with zymolyase
as above. The spheroplast pellet was resuspended in 180 mL of 20AA6.5
plus 16 mM PMSF per g whole cells. The spheroplast suspension was
homogenized, 40 mL at a time, in the Dounce tissue homogenizer for
5 min (approximately 40 strokes). The homogenates were combined and
centrifuged at 4000 ×
g
for 7 min. The supernatant
was pelleted at 4000 ×
g
for 20 min, 12,000
×
g
for 30 min, and 15,000 ×
g
for 30 min, each time discarding the pellet. The final supernatant
was then filtered on a 250 mL Amicon Stir Cell with a 10 kDa cutoff
regenerated cellulose membrane. The filtrate was then concentrated
using the same stir cell with a 3 kDa cutoff membrane and then further
with a 3 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra 2 mL Centrifugal filter (Sigma) centrifuged
at 3858 ×
g
for 45 min. One independent preparation
of the retentate was frozen and lyophilized. An unfrozen aliquot was
incubated in 20 mM BCS overnight in the glovebox. Retentates were
analyzed by LC-ESI-MS.
Cytosol, SME, and cell lysate samples
were lyophilized (Labconco
Freezone 2.5 Plus), resuspended in a minimal volume of double-distilled
water, and then subjected to LC-ESI-MS.
Mitochondrial Sample Preparation
Yeast mitochondria
were isolated as described
27
with minor
modifications. Large-scale (25 L) cell cultures were harvested at
OD600 = 0.6–0.8; small-scale (1.5 L) isolations were harvested
at OD600 = 1.2–1.4. Standard density gradients consisted of
two 10 mL layers of 20AA6.5 solutions containing 32% (top) and 60%
(bottom) (w/v) sucrose. An alternative gradient used 40% (top) and
50% (bottom); another alternative used 7 mL of 32% (top), 7 mL of
45% (middle), and 7 mL of 60% (bottom) sucrose. Alternative gradients
were run simultaneously using aliquots from the same mitochondrial
suspension. SH buffer was replaced with SAA2.
Mitochondrial
suspensions were pelleted at 12,000 ×
g
for
10 min. SMEs were generated by resuspending mitochondrial pellets
in 20× dilution of lysis buffer, consisting of 5 mM dodecylmaltoside
and 20AA6.5. Mitoplasts were generated by hypotonic lysis essentially
as described.
13
Mitochondrial pellets were
resuspended in 20× dilution of 10 mM ammonium acetate for 15
min. Mitoplasts and fragments were centrifuged at 25,655 ×
g
for 15 min. The supernatant, which represented the IMS
fraction, was removed. Soluble mitoplast extracts (called SmpEs) were
generated by resuspending the mitoplast pellet in the same volume
of lysis buffer used to generate SMEs. IMS samples were concentrated
10× for Western blot analysis using a 3 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra
2 mL Centrifugal filter centrifuged at 3858 ×
g
for 45 min. Protein concentration was evaluated using a Pierce BCA
Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).
Proteinase K and NaCl Solution Treatment of Mitochondria
Mitochondria were pelleted at 12,000 ×
g
for
10 min, and mitoplasts were separated from the IMS fraction as indicated
above. Proteinase K stock solution was prepared in SAA2 buffer (1
mg/mL). One milliliter of the ProK stock solution was added to ∼90
mg of pelleted mitochondria. After 30 min, the mitochondria were pelleted
at 12,000 ×
g
for 10 min. The SME was generated
by addition of 1 mL of 5 mM dodecylmaltoside and 20AA6.5 (initial
concentrations) and adding 100 μL of 0.2 M PMSF stock solution
in ethanol to inhibit any residual ProK. One milliliter of ProK stock
solution was also added to 1.8 mL of individual IMS fractions and
incubated at 5 °C in the glovebox for 30, 60, and 120 min durations.
At the end of each duration, protease activity was halted by adding
100 μL of the PMSF solution.
About 90 mg of mitochondria
were resuspended and incubated in a NaCl solution (100 mM NaCl plus
0.6 M sorbitol) at 5 °C in the glovebox for 15 min. Mitochondria
were pelleted at 12,000 ×
g
for 10 min, and
the supernatant was removed. Lysis buffer was then added to generate
the SMEs as already described.
LC-ICP-MS and Elemental Analysis
Samples (100 μL)
were injected into an LC-ICP-MS instrument configured as described.
28
All samples were filtered using a 0.2 μm
pore syringe filter (Titan3, Thermo Scientific) prior to injection
on the LC-ICP-MS. Samples were injected into either low-mass (Superdex
30
Peptide
or
Increase
10/300 GL,
Cytiva) or high-mass (Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL, Cytiva) at
a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The low-mass
Peptide
column
was replaced mid-study with the
Increase
column,
resulting in minor shifts of elution volumes. For fractionation, lysate
was injected onto two low-mass columns connected in series at a flow
rate of 0.25 mL/min. Fractions (1.5 mL) obtained using an Agilent
1260 Infinity Bioinert fraction collector were frozen and lyophilized
for LC-ESI-MS analysis. SAA2 and lysis buffers were exchanged with
20AA6.5 preceding lyophilization. This involved concentrating samples,
diluting 10× with buffer, and re-concentrating (repeated twice).
For elemental analysis, 150 μL of double-distilled water
was added to 100–200 mg of pelleted mitochondria. A portion
(175 μL) of the suspension was mixed with 300 μL of trace-metal-grade
70% (w/v) HNO
3
(Fisher) in a 15 mL plastic screw-top tube
(Corning) which was finally sealed with electrical tape. Samples were
incubated at 70 °C for 2 days. Once cooled, samples were treated
with 1.5 mL of 35% (w/v) H
2
O
2
. Samples were
additionally incubated at 80 °C for 1 day and then diluted with
double-distilled water to a final volume of 21 mL (0.5% HNO
3
and 2.5% H
2
O
2
). The metal concentrations were
determined by ICP-MS. All samples from three independent batches were
run in technical triplicate. A packing efficiency of 0.77 for pelleted
mitochondria was assumed.
22
Sample Manipulations
The cytosol and SMEs were concentrated
for LC-ESI-MS analysis. Prior to concentration, samples were filtered
through 10 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filters, 2 mL capacity,
spun at 3858 ×
g
for 1 h. The 10 kDa filtrates
were then concentrated in 3 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra 2 mL Centrifugal
filters spun at 3858 ×
g
for 1 h. Concentrating
in this manner typically required four consecutive rounds of centrifugation.
After each round, the filtrate was removed, and an additional sample
was added to the retentate in the same filter.
Western blots
were run as described
23
using antibodies
at the same concentrations. Anti-COX3 (Thermo Scientific) and anti-SOD1
(Stress Marq) were diluted 2000×.
Microscopy
GFP clones were cultured from single colonies
maintained on YPAD plates. Clones were cultured in 50 mL of YPAD supplemented
with 75 μM copper sulfate. Cells were pelleted at 5000 ×
g
for 5 min. Whole cells were suspended in 20 mM ammonium
bicarbonate, pH 7.5. Isolated mitochondria were suspended in SAA2
buffer and kept in a refrigerated glovebox overnight following isolation.
Slides were coated with poly-
l
-lysine for 1 h on a rocker
at RT. Excess was removed and slides were dried at RT overnight. MitoTracker
Red CMXRos (Thermo Scientific) was prepared in a dimethyl sulfoxide
stock solution of 1 mM from the desiccated solid. MitoTracker was
added to the mitochondrial suspension to a final concentration of
100 nM. The suspension was agitated in a 30 °C incubator shaker
for 45 min. Mitochondria were pelleted at 12,000 ×
g
for 10 min and resuspended in minimal SAA2 buffer. Samples were
imaged using a Zeiss LSM 780 NLO multiphoton microscope and an airy
scan detector. MitoTracker was excited at 560 nm, and its emission
was measured at 599 nm. GFP was excited at 488 nm, and its emission
was measured at 510 nm. GFP emission was measured after filtering
>570 nm light. Image brightness and contrast were adjusted using
the
“despeckle” function in ImageJ.
LC-ESI-MS
Samples were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific
Q Exactive Focus coupled with an LC unit (ultimate 3000 RS). Samples
were separated by injecting 10 μL of sample into a BioBasic-18
(2.1 × 150 mm; 3 μm) C18 column (Thermo Scientific). The
mobile phase consisted of 10 mM ammonium acetate (eluent A) and methanol
with 10 mM ammonium acetate (eluent B). The flow rate was set at 300
μL/min with the following gradient: 0–5.0 min 5% B, 5–12
min to 5–100% B, 12–15 min hold 100% B, 15.1–20
min hold 5% B. A Q Exactive Focus HESI source was operated in full
MS in positive and negative ESI mode. The mass resolution was tuned
to 70,000 full width at half maximum at
m
/
z
200. The spray voltage was set to 3.75 kV for positive
mode and 3.3 kV for negative mode. The sheath gas and auxiliary gas
flow rates were set to 35 and 10 arbitrary units, respectively. The
transfer capillary temperature and the auxiliary gas heater temperature
were held at 275 and 300 °C, respectively. The S-Lens RF level
was set at 50 v. Exactive Series 2.8 SP1/Xcalibur 4.0 software was
used for data acquisition and processing.
Results
While investigating copper species within isolated
mitochondria
and the cytosol of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
, we noticed that the major copper species detected in isolated mitochondria,
previously called Cu5000, co-migrated with the dominant copper species
in the 10 kDa-filtered cytosol. To investigate further, yeast strain
W303 cells were grown in the respiring minimal medium supplemented
with 50 μM Cu, a significant but nontoxic concentration exhibiting
no growth deficit. Both cellular compartments were isolated. Mitochondria
from two independent batches were solubilized and passed through a
0.2 μm filter to obtain SMEs. The filter functioned only to
remove large particles that could have fouled the LC system. Using
improved methods,
28
LC traces revealed
Cu5000 along with some higher-molecular-mass copper-containing species
at or near the void volume of the column (
Figure
1
A). The lysis buffer used was devoid of detectable
Cu species.
Figure 1
Detection of copper species in the cytosol and mitochondria. (A)
Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of two independent SMEs and
two independent cytosolic FTSs. Control traces of the buffers used
to prepare samples were devoid of peaks. Left and right vertical dashed
lines indicate the column void volume and elution volume of Cu5000,
respectively. Cell cultures were supplemented with 50 μM CuSO
4
. (B) Western blot of whole cell extracts, unfiltered SME,
and cytosol solutions staining for mitochondrial porin (POR1), cytosol
localized phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1), and endoplasmic reticulum
localized protein KAR2. Each lane was loaded with 12.5 μg of
protein. (C) Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS chromatogram of the SME prepared
from a cell culture supplemented with 10 μM CuSO
4
. Use of a Superdex
Increase
rather than
Peptide
column resulted in minor elution volume shifts relative
to in A.
Cytosol from two independent batches of fermenting
cells were isolated
and passed through a 10 kDa cutoff membrane. LC traces of cytosolic
FTSs displayed a significant Cu peak that co-migrated with Cu5000
(
Figure
1
A). No other
notable Cu-detected peaks were evident in these traces or in traces
from the isolation buffer. A Western blot of mitochondrial porin (POR1)
and cytosolic phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1) (
Figure
1
B) indicated that these two isolated cellular
compartments were nearly free of contamination. This provided strong
evidence that mitochondrial Cu5000 was not an artifact of cytosolic
contamination and that cytosolic Cu5000 was not an artifact of mitochondrial
contamination. Significant levels of this copper-containing protein
were present in both cellular compartments.
This was an important
point as even modest contamination of cytosol
(or ER) in mitochondrial extracts could be responsible for the observed
Cu5000 in those extracts. To investigate this further, the density
gradients used in mitochondrial isolations were altered to determine
whether Cu5000 intensities varied in proportion to the contamination
level. We found that Cu5000 peak intensity was correlated with mitochondrial
markers POR1 and COX3 and not with markers for other organelles (
Figure S1
). This verified that Cu5000 observed
in SMEs originated from mitochondria, not from cytosol or ER contamination.
The average copper concentration of acid-digested isolated mitochondria
from cells supplemented with 50 μM CuSO
4
was 87 ±
18 μM (
n
= 3 independent batches). Of this,
32 ± 2 μM was soluble copper that could pass through a
0.2 μm filter. Based on calibrated peak areas, 18 ± 3 μM
copper was associated with Cu5000, which corresponded to 21% of total
mitochondrial copper and 56% of soluble mitochondrial copper under
the condition tested.
We had anticipated that low-mass copper
species would constitute
the majority of mitochondrial copper in line with the current Cu
L
hypothesis. In contrast, the low-mass region (
Figure
1
A, 2000–200 Da; 18–35
mL elution volume) in LC traces of SMEs was virtually devoid of copper
species.
The level of copper supplementation in the growth media
affected
the concentration of Cu5000 in the cytosol,
23
and we wondered whether a similar effect would be observed in SMEs.
To investigate, we supplemented media with less copper (10 μM
CuSO
4
) and found that the Cu5000 peak was present in SME
traces at a reduced intensity (
Figure
1
C) relative to peaks in the void region.
Mitochondrial
Cu5000 was observed in all preparations tested, but
its peak intensity also varied with the growth medium (
Figure S2
). Using glycerol/ethanol as a carbon
source, the intensity of Cu5000 relative to the copper void peaks
declined in the YPEG medium compared to that in CSM or MM. We concluded
that Cu5000 is present in the mitochondria of healthy (unstressed)
cells but that its concentration depends on the growth medium and
the level of copper supplementation in the medium.
Our next
objective was to identify Cu5000. To ensure a sufficient
concentration for detection by LC-ESI-MS, we isolated 66 grams of
wet cells from a 24 L culture. We lysed the cells and passed the soluble
fraction through a 10 kDa cutoff membrane. We then passed the FTS
through a 3 kDa cutoff membrane and collected the retentate. This
solution was lyophilized, resuspended in buffer, and passed through
two size-exclusion columns connected in series. An intense Cu5000
peak was detected (
Figure
2
A).
Figure 2
Identification of Cu5000 as metallothionein CUP1. (A) Copper-detected
LC-ICP-MS chromatogram of the purified cell lysate with collected
fractions indicated. (B) LC-ESI-MS (negative mode) spectra of lyophilized
collected chromatographic fractions from A. (C) LC-ESI-MS spectra
of filtered samples including (from top) lyophilized cell lysate,
matched nonlyophilized cell lysate, SME, cytosol from cells grown
on
63
Cu media, and the cytosol from cells grown on
65
Cu media. (D) Copper-detected (blue) and zinc-detected (green)
LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of the isolated cytosol FTS from two independent
batches of WT DTY005 cells and two independent batches of ΔCUP1
cells. The left vertical dashed line indicates the void volume, and
the middle line indicates the volume of a copper peak that is stronger
in the ΔCUP1 cytosol than in the WT cytosol (suspected of being
metallothionein CRS5). The right vertical line indicates the position
of CUP1. (E) LC-ESI-MS spectra of lysate 2 incubated in 20 mM BCS
collected in negative mode. (F) apo-CUP1 detected in the same spectrum
as E; (G) [Cu(BCS)
2
H]
−2
detected in the
same spectrum as E. CUP1 and apo-CUP1 species were located by screening
the LC-ESI-MS chromatogram for masses near those expected.
Eight fractions (F1–F8) were collected,
corresponding to
before, during, and after elution of Cu5000. Each fraction was subjected
to negative-mode LC-ESI-MS. Fractions F3–F7 displayed a complex
isotopologue pattern with a base peak at
m
/
z
= 1540.87 and parent peak at
m
/
z
= 1539.12 (
z
= 4) (
Figure
2
B). This indicated species with 6160.48 Da.
The intensity of the pattern increased, maximized, and decreased harmoniously
with the Cu5000 LC intensity, confirming that the detected pattern
arose from Cu5000.
Related satellite spectral patterns were
evident on both sides
of the main pattern, with Δ
m
± 16–17
amu. The same main spectral pattern was evident in SMEs (
Figure
2
C, third trace),
confirming that Cu5000 was present in both cellular compartments.
Lyophilization had no effect on the pattern (
Figure
2
C, first vs second trace). The same species
was detected in positive mode with a base peak
m
/
z
= 1542.89 (
z
= 4) and was similarly unaffected
by lyophilization (
Figure S3
).
A
species of similar mass, with base peak
m
/
z
= 1542.2 (
z
= 4), has been observed using
positive-mode CE-MS for metallothionein CUP1 from
S.
cerevisiae
.
29
This protein,
with a mass of 6156 Da, corresponds to CUP1 in which the first eight
amino acid residues are truncated, eight copper ions are bound, and
all coordinating cysteines are deprotonated. The mass of our species
of interest corresponded well in both positive and negative modes,
and so we tentatively attributed it to CUP1.
In their mass spectral
study of CUP1, Knudsen et al.
29
also observed
a satellite pattern at −16
amu, which they attributed to cyclization of the N-terminal glutamate
of CUP1 to form pyroglutamate. The additional satellite pattern that
we observed at +17 amu is most likely due to an ammonium adduct (−H
and +NH
4
+
), due to the elevated buffer concentration
after lyophilization.
The mass obtained using the base peak
of the detected isotopologue
pattern matched that of metallothionein CUP1 with a statistical mixture
of the two dominant copper isotopes according to their natural abundances
(69.2%
63
Cu; 30.8%
65
Cu). To verify this assignment,
we isolated the cytosol from a batch of yeast grown on medium supplemented
exclusively with
63
Cu and from another batch exclusively
grown with
65
Cu. The resulting ESI-MS patterns shifted
according to the isotope used if eight copper ions were bound, verifying
the assignment of Cu5000 as CUP1 (
Figure
2
C). The observed deviation of 1 amu was likely
the result of minor isotopic impurities in reagents and/or growth
media.
To evaluate whether Cu5000 arose from CUP1 using a genetics-based
approach, we examined LC traces of cytosol from ΔCUP1 cells.
As a positive control, Cu5000 was detected in LC traces of two independent
batches of cytosolic FTSs isolated from the parent strain, DTY005
(
Figure
2
D). As anticipated,
LC traces of FTS from two batches of ΔCUP1 cells did not exhibit
Cu5000, confirming results and conclusions from an earlier study.
23
The higher mass copper species that coeluted
with zinc in that study was proposed to be the other metallothionein
in
S. cerevisiae
, CRS5.
We verified the number
of copper ions bound to CUP1 by adding an
excess of the copper-specific chelator BCS to cell lysate. Negative-mode
ESI-MS spectra of the resulting solutions lacked the original isotopologue
pattern and exhibited a new pattern (
Figure
2
E) with a base peak at
m
/
z
= 1413.26 and parent peak at
m
/
z
= 1412.01, both
z
= 4 (
Figure
2
F). The resultant
molecular mass of 5652.04 amu was assigned to apo-CUP1. The parent
mass was 508.44 amu lower than that of holo-CUP1 prior to incubation
with BCS. A loss of eight
63
Cu ions would contribute 504
amu of this loss; the remaining 4 amu was likely due to protonation
events. The expected Cu(BCS)
2
complex also formed post-incubation,
detected as [Cu(BCS)
2
H]
−2
(
Figure
2
G). We concluded that the detected
CUP1 species contains eight Cu ions that could be removed by the BCS
chelator. Unless BCS was added, apo-CUP1 was not detected in any cell
lysates or in any isolated batch of cytosol over the course of the
entire study (
Figure S4
). Similarly, no
form of CUP1 containing intermediate numbers of copper ions bound
was detected. Increasing equivalents of BCS were incubated with WT
cytosol (
Figure S5
), but still no intermediates
were observed. Collectively, these results suggest cooperative Cu
binding to CUP1.
To determine the submitochondrial location
of CUP1, we generated
mitoplasts from isolated mitochondria by means of hypotonic lysis.
13
,
30
,
31
After selective rupture of the
OM, the buffer should contain IMS proteins and perhaps proteins that
are weakly associated with the OM. Mitoplast lysates should contain
soluble proteins from the matrix and perhaps proteins that are weakly
associated with the IM. After separating the IMS fraction, mitoplasts
were lysed, and the resulting SmpE was passed through a 0.2 μm
filter. The LC trace of the resulting IMS FTS exhibited an intense
CUP1 peak, as well as a minor second peak with an apparent mass of
∼11 kDa (
Figure
3
A, top trace). We hypothesize that this minor peak arose from COX17.
Figure 3
Mitoplasting
indicates that mitochondrial CUP1 is localized to
the IMS. (A) Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of IMS and SmpE
subfractions of isolated mitochondria. Control traces of hypotonic
and lysis buffers were essentially devoid of copper peaks. (B) Western
blot of respective unfiltered samples used in A. The IMS sample was
concentrated before blotting. Each lane was loaded with 14 μg
of protein.
The LC trace of the SmpE exhibited a diminished
CUP1 peak (
Figure
3
A, second trace).
It also exhibited intense high-mass (>10 kDa) unresolved Cu species
near or at the void, which likely included other Cu-binding proteins,
e.g., COX. The minor peak hypothesized to be COX17 was absent, consistent
with that assignment. In principle, the traces of the SME (
Figure
3
A, third trace) should
be the sum of the traces from the IMS and SmpE, and this was qualitatively
the case apart from a slight mixing of IMS CUP1 with the mitoplast
lysate. Thus, the procedure successfully divided the mitochondrial
copper content into the two indicated subfractions. LC traces of the
hypotonic and lysis buffers used in the experiment were devoid of
significant copper features (
Figure
3
bottom two traces). Since >80% of the CUP1 peak
intensity
was found in the IMS fraction, we concluded that CUP1 localizes to
the IMS in intact mitochondria.
A Western blot was obtained
in conjunction with this experiment
to confirm separation of the IMS fraction and mitoplasts. The presence
of POR1, SOD1, COX3, and PGK1 was investigated in the whole cell lysate,
the SME, the IMS fraction after mitoplasting, and the SmpE, which
should contain IM and matrix fractions. The forementioned proteins
are found in the OM, IMS, IM, and cytosol, respectively. The SME served
as a positive control for mitochondrial proteins and contained POR1,
SOD1, and COX3, as expected. The IMS fraction contained SOD1 as expected.
SOD1 colocalizes to both the cytosol and IMS;
32
however, the lack of an observable PGK1 band in all mitochondrial
samples suggested that the detected SOD1 arose from the population
within the IMS and was not due to cytosolic contamination. Finally,
the SmpE exhibited a strong COX3 band, as expected.
We considered
that CUP1, which we tentatively concluded to be in
the IMS, might be cytosolic CUP1 that had adhered to the exterior
of mitochondria during isolation. In that case, CUP1 could have potentially
been released into SMEs and the IMS fraction during OM rupture. To
investigate, we incubated the IMS fraction and intact mitochondria
separately with the protease proteinase K. As a positive control,
the IMS fraction was treated with the protease for 30, 60, and 120
min. The protease inhibitor PMSF was added at the end of each timepoint
to inhibit further hydrolytic activity. The corresponding CUP1 LC
peaks shifted with incubation time to lower apparent masses, indicating
time-dependent hydrolysis (
Figure
4
A, top traces). In contrast, the CUP1 peak was unaffected
in an SME solution when intact mitochondria were treated with proteinase
K (
Figure
4
A, third
trace); this suggested that CUP1 in the IMS was protected from the
protease by the OM. Neither the PMSF nor the ethanol used to dissolve
the reagent affected Cu binding or the apparent mass of the CUP1 peak
(
Figure
4
A, second
trace). Parenthetically, the peak tentatively assigned to COX17 declined
in intensity upon exposure to proteinase K but was unaffected in intact
mitochondria. Since COX17 is an IMS protein, this result supported
our assignment.
Figure 4
CUP1 does not adhere to the mitochondrial exterior. (A)
Copper-detected
LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of the IMS fraction treated with proteinase
K, an IMS fraction not treated with ProK, and the SME fraction after
treatment with ProK. Incubation durations in the top chromatograms
were 30, 60, and 120 min, indicated by darker to lighter blue traces
and the arrow direction. PMSF was added to inhibit protease activity
at the end of the duration. The control trace of ProK + PMSF solution
was devoid of copper peaks. (B) Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS chromatograms
of the mitochondrial supernatant after incubation with NaCl buffer
and centrifugation. Bottom trace is a positive control demonstrating
that CUP1 was in the mitochondrial sample used. Top trace is a negative
control showing the absence of copper in the NaCl buffer.
To further evaluate whether CUP1 was in the IMS
or adventitiously
associated with the OM, we washed isolated mitochondria with a NaCl
solution and examined the resulting wash and SME by LC-ICP-MS. A similar
procedure had been used to remove proteins adhering to the mitochondrial
OM.
31
,
32
The LC trace of the wash solution was devoid
of the CUP1 peak both before and after incubation with intact mitochondria
(
Figure
4
, A and B).
This again supported our conclusion that CUP1 was located within the
organelle, not bound on the surface. The SME obtained from the NaCl-treated
mitochondria exhibited an intense CUP1 peak. These trends, observed
using the W303 strain, were also observed in analogous studies using
BY4741 cells (
Figure S6
). The results of
both the NaCl solution and proteinase K experiments indicated that
CUP1 was contained within the mitochondrial IMS rather than adhered
to the exterior OM surface.
To provide insight as to the potential
function of CUP1 within
the mitochondria, we prepared SMEs from WT and ΔCUP1 cells in
a DTY005 background. Mirroring observations previously made from the
isolated cytosol, the trace of the ΔCUP1 SME (
Figure
5
A, top traces) lacked the CUP1
peak which was observed in the WT control (
Figure
5
A, bottom traces). The presence of CUP1 within
DTY005 mitochondria excluded the possibility that the colocalization
of CUP1 was unique to the W303 strain.
Figure 5
SME of isolated WT and
ΔCUP1 mitochondria. (A) LC-ICP-MS
copper-detected chromatogram of filtered SMEs generated from independent
replicates of isolated ΔCUP1 (top traces) and WT (bottom traces).
The insets above traces are magnified regions depicting Cu
LMM
, multiplied by the indicated factor. Use of an
Increase
column resulted in minor elution volume shifts relative to that
in
Figure
2
. (B) Western
blot of unfiltered samples from A. Each lane was loaded with 8.7 μg
of protein.
We additionally observed LMM copper complexes in
the DTY005 background
SME (
Figure
5
, bracketed
regions). Deletion of
CUP1
resulted in an approximately
twofold increase in the LMM copper complex intensity.
This suggested
that the mitochondrial concentration of these complexes
may be inversely related to the abundance of CUP1 in the IMS. Supporting
this, LMM copper complexes were observed in SMEs from W303 cells cultured
under a condition where CUP1 abundance was reduced (
Figure S2
).
Since CUP1 is encoded in the nucleus and
present in the cytosol,
we considered that cytosolic CUP1 might enter mitochondria by passing
through OM pores. The limit for protein passage through these pores
has been estimated at 4–12 kDa.
33
To investigate this, we obtained a strain of yeast in which CUP1
was fused with the GFP at the C-terminus.
The molecular mass
of the CUP1-GFP chimera (∼ 34 kDa) was
sufficiently high to exclude the possibility that it could enter mitochondria
through OM pores. One complication was that
S. cerevisiae
contains two identical genetic copies of
CUP1
,
called
CUP1-1
and
CUP1-2
. Separate
strains in which each gene was fused with GFP were obtained, but a
strain in which both were GFP tagged was unavailable. CUP1 chromatographic
peaks were observed in SMEs obtained from the BY4741 background strain
(
Figure
6
A). This further
confirmed that the localization of CUP1 in mitochondria was not unique
to a single strain; it was detected independently within W303, DTY005,
and BY4741 mitochondria. SMEs from CUP1-1-GFP and CUP1-2-GFP cells
exhibited CUP1 peaks that were less intense relative to the high-mass
unresolved void peak as the WT SME isolated from BY4741 parent cells
(
Figure
6
A). The observed
CUP1 peaks arose from expression of the
CUP1
gene
that was not fused with GFP, i.e., CUP1-2 in the CUP1-1-GFP strain
and CUP1-1 in the CUP1-2-GFP strain. Also evident are low-intensity
peaks in the LMM region which might reflect nonproteinaceous copper
coordination complexes (
Figure
6
A, bracketed regions). Interestingly, the fusion of GFP to
CUP1 also perturbed these LMM complexes relative to the WT control,
though the effect was less prominent than observed with the DTY005
background.
Figure 6
LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of BY4741 WT and CUP1-GFP chimera SMEs.
(A) Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS chromatograms of SMEs generated from
CUP1-1-GFP, CUP1-2-GFP, and two batches of WT BY4741 background cells.
The low-mass
Increase
column was used. The vertical
line indicates the position of CUP1, whereas the bracket indicates
a range of elution volumes in which LMM copper complexes are detected.
The insets above traces show magnified regions depicting Cu
LMM
, multiplied by the indicated factor. (B) Copper-detected LC-ICP-MS
chromatograms of the SME (same samples as in A). The high-mass column
was used. (C) Western blot of unfiltered samples used in parts A and
B. Each lane was loaded with 5.9 μg of protein.
The same solutions, when chromatographed on a column
capable of
resolving higher masses, exhibited a half-dozen copper-detected peaks
(
Figure
6
B). The peaks
were generally reproducible for SMEs obtained from WT and CUP1-GFP
mutant cells. They arose from unassigned high-molecular-mass copper
proteins or complexes in the mitochondria. The only qualitative difference
was the presence of a Cu-detected peak in the CUP1-GFP SMEs that could
potentially be assigned to the chimera (green vertical dashed line).
A Western blot suggested that the detected mitochondrial CUP1 was
not due to cytosolic contamination, as a PGK1 band was not observed
in SMEs used in the study (
Figure
6
C).
To investigate whether CUP1-GFP was present
in SMEs, we collected
fluorescence confocal microscopic images of isolated intact mitochondria
from CUP1-GFP cells that had been labeled with MitoTracker. The two
fluorescent labels overlapped in merged images in both clones (
Figure
7
A,B), providing further
evidence that CUP1-GFP was indeed able to enter mitochondria. Given
the large size of the CUP1-GFP chimera, our experiments suggest that
CUP1-GFP (and by extension CUP1 itself) may enter mitochondria by
a mechanism that does not involve passage through OM pores. We also
examined whole CUP1-GFP cells using the same imaging method. Fluorescence
from CUP1-GFP was evident throughout the cells, including the cytosol
and mitochondria, but vacuoles lacked fluorescence, suggesting that
the concentration of intact CUP1-GFP in these organelles was very
low, if not absent (
Figure
7
C).
Figure 7
Confocal microscopic images of mitochondria and whole cells from
CUP1-GFP clones. (A) Isolated CUP1-1-GFP and (B) CUP1-2-GFP mitochondria
incubated with MitoTracker Red. The left image is MitoTracker fluorescence;
the middle image is GFP fluorescence, and the right image is the merge.
(C) GFP fluorescence of CUP1-1-GFP (left) and CUP1-2-GFP (right) whole
cells. Scale bars for all images: 10 μm.
Discussion
Dual Localization of Cu
8
-CUP1
The main conclusion
of this paper is that holo-metallothionein CUP1 is the major copper
species in the cytosol and is the dominant soluble copper species
in mitochondria of healthy WT respiring
S. cerevisiae
cells grown under copper-replete but nontoxic conditions (minimal
media, with glycerol/ethanol as a carbon source and 10 or 50 μM
CuSO
4
).
The first inkling of mitochondrial metallothioneins
was in 1961 when “mitochondrocuprein”, a copper-bound
sulfur-rich protein, was reported in the mitochondria of newborn livers.
34
This protein was soon associated with metallothioneins
(MTs).
35
,
36
Sakurai et al.
37
used immunohistochemical staining to demonstrate that MTs were present
in the cytosol, mitochondria, and nuclei of hepatocytes from rats
with hepatitis. Ye et al.
33
demonstrated
that zinc ions bound to mammalian MTs
38
could be imported into isolated liver mitochondria under in vitro
conditions. Reinecke et al.
39
found that
MT expression in HeLa cells was induced when cells were treated with
the mitochondrial-acting pesticide rotenone. They concluded that the
MT protects mitochondria against ROS and provides a response to various
diseased states.
Despite these earlier reports, Cu-bound MTs
are commonly thought
to be exclusively cytosolic. Wright et al.
40
reported no evidence for mitochondrial localization of CUP1. Cobine
et al.
13
concluded that CUP1 and CRS5 do
not contribute to the mitochondrial copper pool. Copper-bound MTs
in mitochondria are not described in any major review of copper metabolism
in this organelle,
7
,
17
,
41
−
44
and proteomics studies do not include MTs as a mitochondrial protein.
45
,
46
The discord regarding MTs and mitochondrial localization has
been
compounded by uncertainties regarding how cytosolic metal-bound MTs
could enter this organelle and what it would do there. MTs play protective
cellular roles in metal toxicity and ROS damage, and they also sequester
metals as an essential component of homeostatic regulatory mechanisms.
However, this functional stereotype may limit consideration of other
cellular roles. Lindeque et al.
36
lamented
that “perhaps the uncertainty of their function or (mode of)
import into the mitochondrion makes it hard to finally conclude that
MTs are also mitochondrial proteins”. For these reasons, a
major focus of the current study was to demonstrate unequivocally
the presence of CUP1 in both the cytosol and the IMS of mitochondria
of healthy nondistressed (diseased or heavy-metal intoxicated) WT
S. cerevisiae
cells.
How Does Cytosolic CUP1 Enter Mitochondria?
We have
considered four scenarios. The first is that CUP1 passes folded and
metalated through a channel/pore on the OM (
Figure
8
B). Ye et al.
33
suggested that Zn-MT in its native conformation is translocated
through the OM while retaining the bound metal. Small proteins like
CUP1 or COX17 could conceivably pass through open-state pores, especially
given their dynamic structural flexibility.
47
,
48
However, our results and those of Bragina et al.
49
disfavor this import pathway. Given the large size of the
CUP1-GFP chimera and its ability to enter mitochondria, it seems unlikely
that this protein enters through an OM pore, though it is feasible
that CUP1 and CUP1-GFP could enter the mitochondria via differing
mechanisms. Perhaps in support of this, the detected CUP1 in WT SMEs
is more than twofold that of each of the respective chimera strains
(
Figure
6
A).
Figure 8
Possible scenarios
of CUP1 import into mitochondria. (A) apo-CUP1
may enter unfolded and become folded and metalated once in the IMS.
CUP1 would then be metalated within the mitochondria by an unidentified
Cu complex, suggested here to be a low-mass Cu
LMM
complex.
(B) CUP1 may enter folded and metalated via VDAC pores in the outer
mitochondrial membrane. Current evidence disfavors this mode of entry.
(C) CUP1 may enter folded and metalated via the secretory pathway,
by membrane fusion and direct organelle contact.
The second possibility is that cytosolic CUP1 enters
mitochondria
via the MIA40/ERV1 pathway
10
,
50
−
52
unfolded, apo, and with all cysteine residues reduced (
Figure
8
A). Once in the IMS,
apo-CUP1 would fold and become metalated by unidentified IMS copper
species. CUP1 contains one of the two major cysteine motifs of MIA40
client protein, but they are contained within other cysteine residues
that are not MIA40-related. Moreover, cysteines in the canonical motifs
of MIA40 client proteins become oxidized to disulfides after entering
the IMS, whereas for CUP1, they remain reduced and coordinated collectively
to eight Cu(I) ions. For these reasons, as well as the lack of detected
apo-CUP1 in both cellular lysates and the isolated cytosol, we disfavor
an MIA40-dependent import mechanism for CUP1.
The third possibility
is that CUP1 enters mitochondria via a MIA40-independent
pathway such as appears to be used by cytochrome c. CUP1 is encoded
with eight additional residues at the N-terminus, but we only detected
truncated CUP1. No effect upon cellular copper resistance or its structural
integrity was observed when CUP1 was modified with an uncleavable
N-terminal extension,
40
suggesting an alternative
purpose for the extension. Although the reason for cleaving the residues
remains unknown, the truncated residues bear resemblance to the presequence
of cytochrome c, and the possibility that this is associated with
trafficking into mitochondria should be considered further.
The fourth and final considered possibility is that CUP1 enters
mitochondria folded and copper bound via the secretory pathway (
Figure
8
C), though the absence
of vacuolar CUP1-GFP in our studies does not support this mechanism.
What Is the Function of CUP1 in the IMS of Mitochondria?
We were initially intrigued by the possibility that CUP1 might deliver
cytosolic copper into mitochondria for installation into apo-COX;
however, this now seems unlikely. Dual localization is not unusual
for mitochondrial proteins; about a third have this property.
53
,
54
If CUP1 were the sought-after copper trafficking species, we would
expect a respiration defect in ΔCUP1 cells, but this has not
been reported. In our hands, ΔCUP1 cells grew like WT cells
on respiring media, though the possibility of a compensatory role
for the other MT CRS5 has not been excluded. Moreover, MTs bind and
sequester Cu ions extremely tightly.
55
−
57
Such ultratight binding
seems inconsistent with a trafficking function. A conformational change
or other means of releasing the Cu bound to CUP1 would be required
to consider it for a trafficking role.
CUP1 may function to
maintain low levels of LMM copper complexes in mitochondria, to lessen
copper toxicity, oxidative damage, or metalloprotein mismetalation,
consistent with the rescue due to expressing CUP1 in ΔSOD1 mutants.
58
,
59
Our results suggest an inverse relationship between the level of
mitochondrial CUP1 and the size of the mitochondrial LMM copper pool.
Future studies are needed to evaluate these possibilities. The possibility
that LMM Cu complexes provide a source of copper for COX also merits
further investigation.
Modification of the Cu
L
Hypothesis
Another
major conclusion of this study is that most mitochondrial copper is
not in a nonproteinacous LMM form within the matrix. Besides detecting
CUP1 in SMEs, we detected numerous soluble copper proteins and low
concentrations of LMM nonproteinaceous copper species (which we call
Cu
LMM
). These results support some but not all aspects
of the Cu
L
hypothesis, and they suggest some modification.
For example, Cu
LMM
might enter the IMS through OM pores
and pass copper (directly or indirectly) to COX17. In this scenario,
CUP1 would serve to limit the levels of Cu
LMM
in both the
cytosol and IMS, such that these LMM complexes would only be present
when the CUP1 binding capacity is at or near saturation. This would
maintain the levels of Cu
LMM
low enough to prevent copper
toxicity in both compartments. LMM Cu complexes have the potential
to damage iron–sulfur cluster assembly,
60
an essential process in the mitochondrial matrix. Stewart
et al.
61
has pointed out that, except for
cyanobacteria, “cuproproteins are not known to exist inside
the bacterial cytoplasm”. In fact, many bacteria contain Cu-transporting
P-type ATPases which pump copper out of the cytoplasm
62
and into the periplasm, the evolutionary relative of the
mitochondrial IMS. This might reflect a strategy of nature to balance
the necessity of using copper to catalyze COX-based respiratory reactions
while minimizing its toxicity to sensitive processes occurring in
the mitochondrial matrix. By scavenging Cu from Cu
LMM
complexes,
CUP1 would minimize the import of such complexes into the matrix and
the subsequent effect upon the essential processes within. More work
is required to determine the localization of the Cu
LMM
species
in mitochondria; regardless of whether Cu
LMM
is(are) located
in the IMS or matrix, our data indicate that the concentration of
such species in mitochondria is low.
In summary, we have determined
that yeast MT CUP1 localizes in
both the cytosol and the IMS of mitochondria. Although the mechanism
by which CUP1 enters mitochondria, its metalation state at entry,
and its cellular role once in the IMS remain uncertain, what is certain
is that the presence of this protein in mitochondria, coupled with
the low levels of LMM labile copper complexes in the organelle previously
thought to dominate the copper content of mitochondria, suggests that
we re-evaluate and restructure our overall understanding of copper
metabolism in this critically important organelle.