1
Introduction
Worldwide, alcohol is
the most commonly misused drug with recent
estimates of over 2.3 billion people being classified as current alcohol
drinkers.
1
,
2
Alcohol use has risen significantly during
the worldwide COVID pandemic across demographics,
3
resulting in more alcohol-related deaths.
4
These surges in alcohol consumption and corresponding deaths
highlight the need to better understand the negative impacts and potential
health risks of excessive alcohol consumption.
With the average
population ages of most countries on the rise,
an estimated 2.1 billion people over 60 years old by 2050,
5
health care systems are threatened to be overwhelmed
by a “silver tsunami” of older adults needing geriatric
care,
6
thus studying the health impacts
and risks specific to older adults is an imperative public health
issue. Alcohol use has been high or rising in most demographics including
adolescents,
7
young adults, and older females
without children.
8
However, compared to
younger drinkers, the percentage of older adult drinkers has had a
greater escalation in recent years,
9
and
older adults often consume alcohol in a hazardous binge drinking pattern.
10
−
14
Recent preclinical research has demonstrated that aged rodents are
more sensitive to the effects of acute ethanol exposure compared to
younger adult rodents.
15
−
20
Furthermore, chronic intermittent ethanol exposure (CIEE), a model
of binge-like ethanol consumption, may produce tolerance to a high-dose
ethanol challenge in aged animals faster than in younger adult animals
21
and impair cognition late in life.
15
,
22
Given the increases in the percentages of drinkers and the engagement
of more hazardous consumption patterns in the aged population, understanding
the potential negative impacts of alcohol on the aged is critical.
Ethanol impairs cognition through a variety of mechanisms that
alter the function of specific brain regions including the hippocampus
as determined by both behavioral studies and electrophysiological
recordings of hippocampal place cells.
23
−
26
One such cognitive function impacted
by CIEE is behavioral flexibility, i.e., the learning of new response
strategies in the face of previously learned stimuli. Impaired behavioral
flexibility has been found in both young adult rats
27
−
31
and aged rats
15
,
22
following chronic ethanol
exposure in adolescence. Due to well-known cognitive deficits in aged
animals,
32
it seems likely that CIEE in
aged animals will also produce deficits in behavioral flexibility
in aged animals. Behavioral flexibility has been argued to be a form
of episodic memory in rats
32
and provides
a behavioral tool to assess the impact of chronic ethanol and aging
on cognitive function. Recently, it has been shown that chronic ethanol
consumption is a predictive factor in the development of dementia
including Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
33
Patients with AD have various cognitive deficits including impairments
in declarative memory and executive function. Most, but not all, studies
reported that patients with AD exhibit deficits in the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Task, a procedure that tests behavioral flexibility (see review
by Guarino et al.
34
). Given that CIEE and
AD impair behavioral flexibility, it is possible to use rodent models
of CIEE in aged animals to investigate molecular pathways underlying
alcohol-induced cognitive deficits associated with AD.
Behavioral
flexibility can be measured using several tasks in rodent
models including reversal learning in the Morris water maze. During
a reversal learning task, subjects are first trained to swim to a
submerged platform that is in a constant location. After learning,
the platform location is rotated 180°, and the animal is given
a series of trails to locate the platform in the new location. This
task requires the animal to suppress previous learning and develop
a new learning strategy. A variety of brain regions are important
for successful behavioral flexibility performance, including reversal
learning tasks in the Morris water maze. One critical brain region
for reversal learning is the hippocampus, as it has been demonstrated
that blocking hippocampal LTD impairs reversal learning performance
in the Morris water maze
35
and that reversal
learning increases the functional connectivity between the hippocampus
and other brain regions in mice.
36
Furthermore,
lesions of either the perforant path or the fimbria/fornix (prominent
hippocampal afferents) impair reversal learning in rodents.
37
,
38
Given the involvement of the hippocampus in behavioral flexibility
and the well-documented impairments in hippocampal function produced
by ethanol
23
and normal biological aging,
32
it is important to understand how CIEE in aged
animals alters the hippocampal proteome.
Understanding how ethanol
exposure interacts with molecular factors
to impact a complex trait, such as dementia, requires the triangulation
of multiple research techniques and the use of established databases.
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics have proven valuable in identifying
potential molecular factors for several complex traits, including
serial reaction times following chronic ethanol exposure
38
and hippocampal protein network dysfunction
in mouse models of AD.
39
Consequently,
it is likely that leveraging the use of proteomic and phosphoproteomic
tools in the hippocampus to understand the interaction of chronic
ethanol exposure with cognition and biological age will reveal important
molecular targets for in-depth investigations.
40
This work is focused on identifying cognitive impairments
and protein
pathways correlated with AD in aged rats. We have undertaken a multilevel
strategy, first by investigating if CIEE impaired behavioral flexibility
in young adult rats (8 weeks old) and aged rats (70 weeks old) differentially,
followed by conducting extensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses
of the hippocampus from the same animals to identify proteins, phosphosites,
and pathways that might impact the observed differential cognitive
deficits as a result of CIEE. We report that CIEE selectively impairs
behavioral flexibility in aged but not young adult rats. Furthermore,
we identified several candidate proteins and molecular pathways affected
by CIEE in the hippocampus of aged rats that have been previously
implicated in cognitive deficits and AD. These results suggest that
chronic binge-like alcohol exposure in the older population is a risk
factor for the development of cognitive deficits associated with protein
pathways that may underly the development of dementia.
2
Experimental Section
2.1
Animals
Two groups of 16 male Sprague–Dawley
rats were used in this study (Envigo, Indianapolis, IN): 8-week-old
young adults and 70-week-old retired breeders. Rats were housed under
standard housing conditions in pairs on a 12:12 light–dark
cycle (lights on at 6 AM). Wood chips were used as bedding with chow
(Teklad food pellets, Envigo), and tap water was provided
ad libitum
throughout the experiment. Animals were allowed
to acclimate for a month during which they were handled 5 days/week
for approximately 5 min to minimize handling stress in subsequent
experiments. Animal care and handling procedures were approved by
the University of Wisconsin—Eau Claire IACUC.
2.2
Spatial Learning Training
A month
after arrival, all rats were trained in the standard submerged platform
task in a Morris water maze.
41
The water
maze was 6 feet in diameter and was placed in a room dedicated to
behavioral experiments. The tank was painted white to mask proximal
cues, leaving several distal cues in the room (wall posters, door,
computer rack, and experimenter). The water was made opaque by white
water-soluble paint (Tempera) and was kept at room temperature (∼21
°C). A video camera was mounted above the center of the water
tank connected with the ANYMAZE tracking system, version 5.3 (Stoelting,
Wood Dale, IL), for data collection. Rats were trained four trials/day,
starting from the compass points to a slightly submerged platform
(∼0.75 in. below the water surface) located in a constant spatial
location. The order of the start locations was counterbalanced in
a Latin square design. To ensure that animals could learn the spatial
memory task prior to chronic intermittent ethanol administration,
rats were trained in the Morris water maze until they reached a mean
escape latency of approximately 10 s for two to three consecutive
days.
42
In addition, aged animals were
impaired in the initial spatial learning (see below), and therefore
all analyses were separated by age of the animal.
2.3
Chronic Intermittent Ethanol Exposure (CIEE)
Paradigm
CIEE treatment began on the day after the rats achieved
the aforementioned performance. Rats were randomly assigned by cage
to receive either 5 g/kg ethanol (37% v/v;
n
young adult
= 6 and
n
aged
=
8) or water (
n
young adult
= 7 and
n
aged
= 7) via gavage every other day for 20
days, thereby resulting in 10 intoxication and 10 withdrawal episodes.
Rats were weighed, and their general health was assessed before every
gavage. In a subset of the ethanol-treated rats, tail vein blood was
sampled an hour after the first gavage to ascertain blood ethanol
levels on an Analox AM-1 Analyzer (Analox Instruments, Stourbridge,
UK). The median blood ethanol levels after the first ethanol gavage
were 156 mg/dL (range = 114.6–169.8 mg/dL) for the young adults
(
n
= 4) and 186 mg/dL (range = 97.4–237.5
mg/dL) for the aged rats (
n
= 5).
2.4
Spatial Memory Test
To investigate
the impact of CIEE on hippocampal-dependent spatial memory, rats underwent
a 60 s probe trial in the Morris water maze on the fifth and tenth
withdrawal days (i.e., the days after the fifth and tenth ethanol
gavages). The platform was removed from the water tank in the probe
trials. The rats started at the point farthest away from the original
goal location and were allowed to swim for 60 s. Afterward, rats were
dried and returned to their home cages. The total time spent in the
initial escape quadrant of the maze was monitored via the ANYMAZE
system and used as a measure of spatial memory.
2.5
Behavioral Flexibility
To investigate
the impact of CIEE on behavioral flexibility, the rats underwent reversal
training (i.e., relearning to a new spatial location in the same environmental
context) 2 days after the last gavage. The escape platform was relocated
180° to the initial training location in the water maze. The
rats were trained for 2 days, four trials per day, using the initial
starting locations. As during initial spatial learning, latency to
the platform and swim path length were measured by the ANYMAZE system.
For rats that could not find the platform within 45 s, they were gently
guided to the platform and allowed to rest on it for ∼5 s.
The first two trials were deemed “learning trials” for
the new platform location, while the subsequent six trials were considered
behavioral flexibility trials.
2.6
Tissue Preparation, Protein Extraction, and
Trypsin Digestion
The day after the last behavioral flexibility
test (i.e., 4 days after the last gavage), rats were sacrificed by
rapid decapitation, and brains were extracted. Bilateral ventral and
dorsal hippocampuses were microdissected on wet ice, frozen on dry
ice, and then stored at −80 °C until use. All rats’
hippocampal tissues were planned to be used for both proteomics and
phosphoproteomics analyses. However, a few samples were excluded from
the proteomics analysis due to technical issues. Therefore, proteomics
data of 13 young adult rats (7 controls vs 6 ethanol-treated) and
12 aged rats (6 controls vs 6 ethanol-treated) were analyzed, while
phosphoproteomics data of 13 young adult rats (7 controls vs 6 ethanol-treated)
and 15 aged rats (7 controls vs 8 ethanol-treated) were evaluated.
Hippocampal tissue was homogenized with homogenizing buffer (20
mM HEPES/8 M urea, pH 8.2) and 200 mg of disruptor beads in Bioruptor
Plus TPX tubes (Diagenode, Denville, NJ, USA) using a Bioruptor Plus
sonication device (Diagenode; 30 cycles of 30 s on and 30 s off).
The homogenates were then transferred to LoBind tubes (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany) and centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C.
Protein levels in the supernatant were measured by a BCA protein assay,
and the volume corresponding to 200 μg of protein was brought
up to 100 μL by adding homogenizing buffer. The samples were
then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 9 mM iodoacetamide
before dilution with 850 μL of 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2, and digestion
with 10 μg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 24 h at
32 °C.
2.7
TMT Labeling and Basic HPLC Fractionation
The trypsin-digested samples were desalted using C18 MacroSpin
tips (Nest Group, Ipswich, MA, USA) and were then lyophilized. The
lyophilized samples were solubilized in 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB,
pH 8.5, and then labeled with 200 μg/10 μL acetonitrile
of TMTpro 16plex tandem mass tag reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA) for 60 min. The reaction was quenched by 5 μL
of 5% hydroxylamine. Each sample was confirmed to have >98% labeling
efficiency. Samples were then pooled by age groups (i.e., samples
from young and old rats were pooled separately) at volumes normalized
by the reporter ion intensities for each channel. The pooled samples
were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Long cartridges (Waters, Milford,
MA, USA), then lyophilized.
The samples were then fractionated
using basic pH reverse-phase HPLC on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation
Dual System (ThermoFisher Scientific) with an XBridge Peptide BEH
C18 column (3.5 μm, 4.6 mm × 250 mm; Waters) running a
60 min gradient of 5% to 60% of 5 mM ammonium formate/90% acetonitrile
solvents. There were 96 fractions collected over the 80 min method
for each pooled sample, which were then concentrated into 12 fractions.
2.8
Phosphopeptide Enrichment
For phosphoproteomic
experiments, phosphopeptides were enriched by the use of Fe-NTA cartridges
on an AssayMAP Bravo Protein Sample Prep Platform (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA, USA).
2.9
Nano-LC-MS/MS Acquisition
An Orbitrap
Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo
Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system was used for data-dependent acquisition
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis of TMT-labeled proteomic
and phosphoproteomic samples, with nanoliquid chromatography separation
and electrospray ionization of eluting peptides. The digested peptide
mixture was loaded onto a HALO C18 2.7 μm EXP Stem Trap (Optimize
Technologies, Oregon City, OR, USA). For proteomic analysis, nano-LC
was performed using 0.2% formic acid in both the solvent A (98% water/2%
acetonitrile) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile/10% isopropanol/10%
water) with a solvent B gradient from 5% to 40% over 120 min at 300
nL/min with an EASY-Spray C18, 75 μL × 50 cm column (ThermoFisher
Scientific). For phosphoproteomic analysis, nano-LC was performed
using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile/0.1%
formic acid) over 120 min at 300 nL/min with an EASY-Spray C18, 75
μL × 50 cm column (ThermoFisher Scientific).
The
mass spectrometer data-dependent acquisition method used for both
proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses involved a 3 s cycle time
with the MS1 survey scan from 340 to 1600
m
/
z
at a resolution of 120 000 (at 200
m
/
z
), followed by HCD MS/MS scans at a resolution of 45 000
with an NCE setting of 32, and the isolation width was set to 0.7
m
/
z
. Ions with charge states of 2 to 5
for proteomics or 2 to 4 for phosphoproteomics were allowed for MS/MS
and, if selected, were placed on an exclusion list for 30 s. The normalized
AGC target settings were 100% for MS1 and 200% for MS2 scans with
maximum ion inject times of 50 and 120 ms, respectively.
2.10
Database Search
Both proteomic and
phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant
software (version 1.6.17). MS/MS spectra were searched against the
Swiss-Port
Rattus norvegicus
database (8135 entries;
UniPort UP000002494; downloaded February 2021; setup for MS2 reporter
ion quantification with TMTpro 16plex isobaric labels) with the Andromeda
peptide search engine embedded in MaxQuant.
2.11
Proteomic Parameters and Analysis
Mass tolerances were set at 4.5 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2. Cysteine
carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification,
and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) was set as a variable modification.
Protein identifications were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate
(FDR) with a minimum of one peptide. Reporter ion channel correction
factors were applied to PSMs which were then filtered to exclude peptides
exceeding the threshold maximum of 50% isolation interference. Sample
groups missing 50% of values were removed from comparisons with no
imputation applied. Samples were normalized by median subtraction.
Normalized protein levels were compared between water- and ethanol-treated
groups by a
t-
test in each age group separately.
Proteins were considered significant and differentially expressed
if they had a
p
-value < 0.05 and were defined
as downregulated when Log
2
fold change (Log
2
FC) < 0 or upregulated when Log
2
FC > 0. Comparisons
between age groups were not performed due to the lack of a reference
sample across separate protein profiling runs.
2.12
Phosphoproteomic Parameters and Analysis
Static modifications set for TMTpro 16plex adducts were assigned
to lysine and N-terminus acetylation (+43.01 Da) and cysteine carbamidomethyl
(+57.02 Da). The variable modifications allowed were phosphorylation
at serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.97 Da) and methionine oxidation
(+15.99 Da). TMTpro 16plex labeled peptide identifications were filtered
at a maximum isolation interference of 50%, a maximum FDR of 1%, and
a phosphorylation site (phosphosite) localization probability of 75%
or higher. Samples were normalized with median subtraction.
Normalized phosphosite levels were compared between water and ethanol
treatment groups by a
t-
test in each age group separately.
Phosphosites were considered significantly and differentially regulated
between treatment groups if they had a
p
-value <
0.05 and were defined as downregulated when Log
2
FC <
−0.263 (i.e., fold change ratio <0.833) or upregulated when
Log
2
FC > 0.263 (i.e., fold change ratio >1.2).
2.13
Functional Annotation
Two lists
of proteins were subjected to overrepresentation analysis: one with
proteins that were differentially expressed in the proteomic analysis
and the other with proteins that were mapped to the differentially
regulated phosphosites. The
clusterprofiler
and
ReactomePA
packages in R v4.1.1 were used to detect pathway
enrichment in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome (KEGG) and reactome
pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms for molecular functions, cellular
components, and biological processes. Significant overrepresented
pathways and GO terms were considered at an FDR-adjusted
p
< 0.05.
2.14
Kinase Activity Profiling Analysis (KAPA)
To identify the upstream regulatory kinase pathways altered based
on the changes in phosphorylation associated with the chronic intermittent
ethanol treatment, we performed the kinase activity profiling analysis
(KAPA), which was implemented in R v4.1.1 as described previously.
43
The kinase-substrate annotation database was
downloaded from PhosphoSitePlus
44
and species
filtered for
Rattus norvegicus
to create a rat kinase–substrate
annotation profile. To assess the kinase activity, we extracted the
site-specific phosphorylation Log
2
ratios of identified
kinase substrates based on the rat kinase–substrate annotation
profile and calculated the average Log
2
ratio of the kinase
substrate targets. Bootstrapping-based random sampling was then performed.
For
k
substrate targets of a specific kinase identified
from the significantly differentially regulated phosphoproteomic data
set, a random selection of
k
phosphorylation sites
from the phosphorylation data set was selected, and the average Log
2
ratio was calculated. The random selection process was repeated
10 000 times. The
Z
-score for the average Log
2
ratio of the specific kinase substrate targets was then calculated
and termed the kinase activity score.
S
represents the average
Log
2
ratio of the extracted site-specific phosphorylation
Log
2
ratio of a specific kinase; Ave and Std represent
the average and standard deviation of the normal distribution obtained
from the averages of 10 000 random samplings of
k
phosphorylation sites; and
k
is the number of kinase
substrate sites identified for a specific kinase from the data sets.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Spatial Learning Was Different in Young Adult
and Aged Rats
We first checked if spatial learning performance
was different between young adult (8 weeks old) and aged rats (70
weeks old) by analyzing the rats’ Morris water maze performance
in the first 8 days before any subjects had reached the learning criteria
(see
Figure
1
A for
an experimental timeline). Young adult rats performed better than
aged rats in initial spatial learning in the water maze as evidenced
by shorter latency (two-way ANOVA with repeated measures; age effect:
F
1,26
= 21.97,
p
< 0.001;
training days effect:
F
5,132
= 23.36,
p
< 0.001;
Figure
1
B) and shorter swim path length (two-way ANOVA with repeated
measures; age effect:
F
1,26
= 27.79,
p
< 0.001; training days effect:
F
7,182
= 34.58,
p
< 0.001;
Figure
1
C) to reach the escape platform.
Given these differences in baseline spatial learning capacity, subsequent
cognitive test data analysis was performed in each age group independently.
Figure 1
(A) Timeline
of the behavioral experimental procedures. Rats were
sacrificed on Day 24. The spatial learning performances of young adult
rats during training were better than aged rats as they demonstrated
reduced latency (B) and shorter swim path length (C) to reach the
platform (***
p
age
< 0.001). Spatial
memory did not significantly differ between ethanol- and water-treated
groups on the fifth (probe 1) and tenth (probe 2) no-gavage days in
both young adult rats (D) and aged rats (E). Young adult rats improved
in probe 2 as they showed significantly reduced time spent in the
target quadrant in probe 2 compared to probe 1 (D; *
p
probe
= 0.013), but only a trended reduction was found
in aged rats (E). In aged rats, the latency to the platform was lower
in ethanol-treated rats than water-treated rats overall in the first
two behavioral flexibility training sessions (F; **
p
= 0.004). Young adult rats improved dramatically (i.e., reduced
latency to platform) across behavioral flexibility testing sessions
without treatment group difference (G;
p
trial
= 0.002). Aged rats treated with water showed very similar behavioral
flexibility improvement as young rats, but those treated with ethanol
did not show improvement until the last two testing sessions (H; **
p
treatment
= 0.009,
p
trial
= 0.008). Graphs are plotted in means with standard error of mean
as error bars.
3.2
Effects of CIEE on Spatial Memory
In young adult rats, CIEE did not alter spatial memory as measured
by probe trials. Specifically, there was no significant difference
between ethanol- and water-treated groups in the time spent in the
initial escape quadrant in the absence of the platform as a function
of probe trial, although subjects, regardless of drug condition, spent
less time in the initial target quadrant in the second probe trial
than the first probe trial (two-way ANOVA with repeated measures;
treatment effect:
F
1,11
= 2.66,
p
= 0.131; trials effect:
F
1,11
= 8.82,
p
= 0.013;
Figure
1
D). In aged rats, neither CIEE nor probe
trials significantly affected the time spent in the initial escape
quadrant (
p
> 0.05;
Figure
1
E).
3.3
CIEE Altered Behavioral Flexibility in Aged
Rats But Not in Young Adult Rats
During the first block of
two trials on reversal day 1 (i.e., the relearning trials), ethanol-treated
aged rats demonstrated faster escape latencies than water-treated
aged rats (
t-
test;
t
13
= 3.44;
p
= 0.004;
Figure
1
F), while no significant treatment group
effect was found in adult rats (
p
> 0.05). The
significant
effect found in aged animals was not due to differential swimming
speed between conditions on the first reversal day (two-way ANOVA,
age by ethanol dose:
F
1,24
= 0.79,
p
> 0.05). It is likely this effect in older animals
treated
with ethanol occurred due to subjects in this condition searching
outside the original platform quadrant earlier in the trial and swimming
into the platform in the new location. Additional research is needed
to determine if this is an accurate conclusion. Due to these unexpected
differences in baseline relearning in the reversal session for aged
animals, we analyzed the subsequent behavioral flexibility using two
different strategies to gain insights into the effect of CIEE on cognition
in aged animals. First, we determined the effect of CIEE on behavioral
flexibility by using average raw latency data for blocks of two trails
for both the aged and adult animals. In aged animals, CIEE significantly
interacted with the behavioral flexibility session to alter performance
(two-way ANOVA with repeated measures, ethanol treatment × trial
block interaction effect:
F
3,39
= 4.161,
p
= 0.012;
Figure S1
).
Post hoc
analysis revealed that for the control aged animals
performance was significantly better in the second trial block (Sidak’s
multiple comparisons
p
= 0.049) and the last trial
block (Sidak’s multiple comparisons
p
= 0.001).
However,
post hoc
analysis also demonstrated that
CIEE-treated aged animals did not improve across the trial blocks
(all
p
-values > 0.05). For adult animals, no effect
of CIEE was found (two-way ANOVA with repeated measures, trials effect,
F
3,33
= 10.11,
p
< 0.001;
Figure S1
). Given the unexpected difference in
the first block of behavioral flexibility trials in aged animals administered
either water or ethanol, we also analyzed the effect of CIEE on behavioral
flexibility by analyzing the percentage change in performance in the
subsequent three blocks of two trials of reversal learning. In young
adult rats, CIEE did not impact behavioral flexibility performance
as measured by percent change in escape latencies (two-way ANOVA;
trials effect:
F
3,33
= 9.07,
p
= 0.002; treatment group effect:
F
1,11
= 1.40,
p
= 0.262;
Figure
1
G). In aged rats, CIEE significantly impaired
behavioral flexibility performance as measured by percent change in
escape latencies as evidenced by ethanol-treated rats displaying significantly
less improvement in escape latencies over trials compared to water-treated
rats (two-way ANOVA; trials effect:
F
3,39
= 5.04,
p
= 0.008; treatment group effect:
F
1,13
= 9.55,
p
= 0.009;
Figure
1
H). Given the finding
that ethanol-treated aged rats had faster latencies in the relearning
trials (the first two trials following reversal location of the platform),
it is possible that a floor effect inhibits ethanol-treated aged animals
from performing better over the subsequent behavioral flexibility
trials. We do not believe this is the case for three reasons. First,
subjects did not progress through the study procedure unless they
previously learned the spatial task at a threshold of approximately
10 s for more than 1 day. As such, all animals tested had previously
demonstrated better performance than what was found in the behavioral
flexibility test. Second, as previously reported, no significant difference
in swim speed by condition was found in the first day of reversal
learning. Finally, ethanol-treated aged animals performed better,
on average, in the last block of two trials in the behavioral flexibility
test than they did in the first two blocks of trials, demonstrating
a floor effect likely did not exist. However, due to the unexpected
difference in the first two relearning trials, future research should
use additional procedures such as serial position reaction times to
investigate the effect of CIEE on behavioral flexibility in aged animals.
Acute ethanol administration has been shown to impair a variety
of cognitive functions that are dependent on the hippocampus (reviewed
by Van Skike et al.
23
). Such deficits in
cognition produced by acute ethanol occur in both adult animals and
aged animals that demonstrate successful baseline cognition functions.
38
However, little is known about the effects of
chronic ethanol exposure on cognition in aged animals. Behavioral
flexibility is a measure of cognition where subjects have to learn
a new response strategy in the face of previously learned stimuli
and therefore requires a measure of cognitive flexibility. The current
results demonstrate a selective impairment in behavioral flexibility
in aged animals undergoing CIEE.
Previous research has demonstrated
that CIEE during adolescence
can impair behavioral flexibility during adulthood
27
−
31
,
45
,
46
and late in life.
22
In addition to producing
behavioral impairments, CIEE during adolescence also resulted in alterations
in the hippocampus. Specifically, such an ethanol exposure pattern
was found to decrease the hippocampal volume,
42
impair NMDA-dependent long-term depression (LTD), and alter both
AMPA and NMDA receptor levels.
45
However,
not all studies found significant changes in hippocampal volume or
BDNF levels following CIEE in adolescent animals.
28
,
29
3.4
Hippocampal Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic
Differences in Ethanol-Treated Rats Were Largely Distinct in Young
Adult and Aged Rats
Figure
2
A shows the number of proteins detected and identified
in each age group, and
Figure
2
B shows the number of identified proteins that differed between
ethanol-treated and water-treated groups at
p
<
0.05. The number of differentially expressed proteins in young adult
rats (
n
= 324) was about double that of aged rats
(
n
= 155). In young adult rats, 324 proteins were
differentially expressed (
p
< 0.05) between treatment
groups with absolute Log
2
FCs (ethanol/water) ranging from
0.029 to 1.994 (
Table S1
). These proteins
include Kcnj13 (Log
2
FC = 1.994), Slc20a2 (Log
2
FC = 0.187), Osgepl1 (Log
2
FC = −0.470), and Fuctinin-3
(Log
2
FC = −0.711;
Figure
2
C). In aged rats, 155 proteins were differentially
expressed between treatment groups with absolute Log
2
FCs
ranging from 0.022 to 0.578 (
Table S2
).
These proteins include Prkcd (Log
2
FC = 0.578), Slc17a6
(Log
2
FC = 0.414), and Heph (Log
2
FC = 0.306;
Figure
2
D). Fifteen proteins
were differentially expressed between treatment groups in both young
adult and aged groups, which might be associated with general proteomic
changes due to chronic ethanol treatment (
Figure
2
E and
Figure
2
F). All proteins were altered in the same directions
in both age groups apart from one protein (Bcl2I1).
Figure 2
Overview of the proteomic
differences in the hippocampus of ethanol
(EtOH)-exposed rats and water (H
2
O)-exposed controls. (A)
Total numbers of proteins identified in each and both age groups.
(B) The numbers of identified proteins differed between EtOH and H
2
O treatment groups at
p
< 0.05 in each
and both age groups. Volcano plots of proteins differed between treatment
groups in (C) young adult rats and (D) aged rats. The
x
-axis represents the Log2 fold change (FC) ratio (EtOH group/water
group), while the
y
-axis represents the −Log
10
p
-value of the between-treatment-group
comparison. The gray line indicates the
p
< 0.05
threshold. Proteins that are upregulated in the EtOH group (Log
2
FC > 0) are labeled red, while those that are downregulated
(Log
2
FC < 0) are labeled blue. Heatmaps of relative
abundance of the 15 proteins that differed at
p
<
0.05 between treatment groups in both age groups are shown in (E)
for young adult rats and in (F) for aged rats.
Figure
3
A shows
the number of phosphosites detected and identified in each age group,
and
Figure
3
B shows
the number of identified phosphosites that differed between ethanol-treated
and water-treated groups at
p
< 0.05 and Log
2
FC ≥ |0.263|. Phosphosites that were compared between
treatment groups are listed in
Table S3
and
Table S4
for young adults and aged rats, respectively.
Contrasting to the proteomic comparison in which more proteins were
differentially expressed in the young adult group, the number of phosphosites
differentially regulated in aged rats (
n
= 1066)
was about 10 times more than that in young adult rats (
n
= 104).
Figure 3
Overview of the phosphoproteomic differences in the hippocampus
of ethanol (EtOH)-exposed rats and water (H
2
O)-exposed
controls. (A) Total numbers of phosphosites detected and identified
in each and both age groups. (B) The numbers of identified phosphosites
that are different in relative abundance between EtOH and H
2
O treatment groups at
p
< 0.05 and Log2 fold
change (FC) ≥ |0.263| in each and both age groups. Volcano
plots of phosphosites differed between treatment groups in (C) young
adult rats and (D) aged rats. The
x
-axis represents
the Log
2
FC (EtOH group/water group), while the
y
-axis represents the −Log
10
p
-value of the between-treatment-group comparison. The gray horizontal
line indicates the
p
< 0.05 threshold, while the
gray vertical lines indicate the Log
2
FC threshold of ±0.263.
Phosphosites with upregulated abundance in the EtOH group (Log
2
FC > 0) are labeled red, while those that are downregulated
(Log
2
FC < 0) are labeled blue. Heatmaps of relative
abundance of the 9 phosphosites that are different between treatment
groups in both age groups at the aforementioned statistical thresholds
are shown in (E) for young adult rats and in (F) for aged rats. Kinase
activity profiling analysis results are shown (G). Kinases with significant
activity scores (
p
< 0.05) in young adult and
aged rats are compared between EtOH- and water-treated rats. (H) Identified
substrate phosphosites of Camk2a (orange bar) and Prkcd (blue bar)
in both age groups. Only phosphosites with Log
2
FC ≥
|0.263| in at least one of the age groups are shown.
In young adult rats, upregulated phosphosites included
Slc4a10
S238/Slc4a7 S238 (Log
2
FC = 1.202), Slc1a3 S4 (Log
2
FC = 0.397), and Gabrb3 S356 (Log
2
FC = 0.407), and top
downregulated phosphosites included Rtn4 S412 (Log
2
FC =
−1.081), Nefh S768 (Log
2
FC = −1.422), and
sites in the 14–3–3 family of proteins (Log
2
FC = −0.805 and −0.450;
Figure
3
C). In aged rats, top upregulated phosphosites
included Slc1a2 T502 (Log
2
FC = 0.352) and Prkcd T643/T505/S682
(Log
2
FCs = 1.012/1.317/0.855), and top downregulated phosphosites
included Atl1 S10 (Log
2
FC = −0.604), Pdlim5 S228
(Log
2
FC = −0.945), Grin2b S1477 (Log
2
FC = −0.428), Stx1a S14 (Log
2
FC = −1.559),
and Mbp S47 (Log
2
FC = −1.672;
Figure
3
D). Nine ethanol-treatment-associated phosphosites
were found in both age groups, of which seven phosphosites were regulated
in opposite directions between age groups, and only Aldoa S36 and
Tars1 S8 were upregulated in both age groups (
Figure
3
E and
Figure
3
F).
Our proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses
showed that CIEE caused
notable molecular impacts in the hippocampus of both young adult and
aged rats. While more proteins were differentially expressed in the
young adult rats than the aged rats, there were far more differentially
regulated phosphosites in the aged rats than in the young adult rats.
Moreover, only several proteomic and phosphoproteomic differences
were shared between age groups. These results suggest that (1) the
hippocampal proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes in response to
CIEE were unique in the two age groups and/or (2) the two age groups
were moving at different speeds and/or taking different routes of
molecular recovery.
Ethanol-treatment-associated proteins that
overlapped between age
groups are involved in caveolae-mediated endocytosis (Cavin1, Cavin2,
and Ehd2; all upregulated), translation (Gars1 and Dars1; both downregulated),
biotin transport (Slc5a6; upregulated), neuron survival, neuron differentiation
and neuritogenesis (Atxn10; downregulated), and purine metabolism
(Xdh; upregulated). Only Bcl2l1, which is an apoptosis regulator,
was found to be downregulated in young adult rats but upregulated
in aged rats. A few of these proteins had been found to be affected
by ethanol exposure. For example, Cavin1 was found to be upregulated
in the serum and liver of ethanol-fed mice and protected hepatocytes
from ethanol-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting reactive nitrogen species.
47
Caveolae-dependent endocytosis was shown to
be important in regulating ethanol-induced toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
internalization in cortical astrocytes which triggered inflammation
response.
48
Another example, Slc5a6, a
major contributor of biotin and pantothenic acid at the human blood–brain
barrier,
49
was observed to have its gene
and protein levels downregulated by chronic ethanol exposure in enteroid
and colonoid cells and inhibited biotin uptake.
50
Xdh is a key purine catabolism enzyme with interconvertible
forms: xanthine dehydrogenase can be converted into xanthine oxidase,
leading to reactive oxygen species production. As the ethanol metabolite
acetaldehyde can induce such conversion, xanthine oxidase has been
proposed to contribute to organ damage by reactive oxygen species.
51
Injection of high-dose ammonia was found to
deplete ATP and convert xanthine dehydrogenase to xanthine oxidase
in rat brains via the activation of NMDA receptors.
52
Although most of these studies were conducted in non-neural
tissues, the general effects of ethanol on these proteins might be
applied to brain tissues and cell types. Finally, additional brain
regions other than the hippocampus, such as the prefrontal cortex
and orbitofrontal cortex, are critical for accurate behavioral flexibility,
and further research needs to conduct omics studies on these brain
regions.
53
,
54
3.5
Kinase Activities of Prkcd and Camk2a Were
Regulated Differentially by CIEE in Young Adult and Aged Rats
Cluster analysis using Euclidean distance revealed the activity profiles
of kinases identified in our experiment as well as distant kinases
that might be altered in the ethanol-treated rats compared to water-treated
rats in each age group (
Figure
3
G). Three clusters resulted: the first cluster contained Tbk1,
Prkcd, Bckdk, Camkk1, and Wnk1, which were generally activated in
ethanol-treated aged rats; the second cluster contained Camk2a, Gsk3a,
Jnk1, etc., which were generally deactivated in ethanol-treated aged
rats; and the third cluster consisted of Akt3, Camkk2, Gsk3b, etc.,
which were generally activated in ethanol-treated young adult rats.
Tbk1 was activated, and Akt2 was deactivated in ethanol-treated rats
of both age groups; however, Prkcd and Camk2a showed the opposite
activation patterns in ethanol-treated rats between age groups. Prkcd
and Camk2a were activated in ethanol-treated aged and young adult
rats, respectively, but were deactivated in the other age group correspondingly.
Nine Camk2a-substrate phosphosites and one Prkcd-substrate phosphosite
were differentially regulated in ethanol-treated rats of either age
group (
p
< 0.05 and Log
2
FC ≥
|0.263|;
Figure
3
H).
These phosphosites represented potential phosphorylation changes by
these kinases that were associated with CIEE in a specific age group.
Note that the kinase activity changes reported could be due to the
changes in the abundances and/or posttranslational modifications of
the kinase substrates.
3.6
Different Pathways Were Enriched in CIEE-Associated
Proteins and Phosphosites in Young Adult and Aged Rats
Differentially
expressed proteins between treatment groups were enriched in various
functional pathways distinctly in each age group (
Figure
4
). In young adult rats, significantly
enriched pathways included GO purine (ribo)nucleoside and guanyl (ribo)nucleotide
binding, RNA splicing, and endosomal transport; KEGG “biosynthesis
of amino acid”, “mitophagy”, and “growth
hormone synthesis secretion and action”; and reactome “vesicle-mediated
transport”, “gap junction degradation”, and “SUMOylation
of chromatin organization proteins”. In aged rats, significantly
enriched pathways included GO sodium transmembrane transporter activity,
cell junction assembly, and import into cells; KEGG “purine
metabolism”, “peroxisome”, and “synaptic
vesicle”; and reactome “amino acid and derivative metabolism”,
“purine catabolism”, “neurotransmitter release
cycle”, and “neuronal system”.
Table S5
and
Table S6
list the details
of pathway analyses for young adult and aged rats, respectively.
Figure 4
Pathway
enrichment analysis results of the proteins differed between
ethanol (EtOH)-exposed rats and water (H
2
O)-exposed controls.
(A–C) Results of gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. The
y
-axes list the top enriched pathways by either age group,
and columns represent the enrichment results of the young adult and
aged rat groups. (D, E) Excerpt results of the Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses and (F, G) reactome pathway
analysis separated by age groups. Each small node represents a protein;
each large node represents a pathway; and a path represents a protein
that is mapped to a pathway.
Top GO terms enriched in the proteins mapped to
the differential
phosphosites were similar between age groups (
Figure
5
A to
Figure
5
C), and these terms encompassed neuronal processes
(axons and dendrites), synaptic function (postsynaptic membrane organization,
vesicle-mediated transport), neurotransmitter level regulation, the
binding of calmodulin, phospholipids, microtubules and actin, and
protein kinase activities. The aged rat group was distinctly enriched
in “glutamate receptor binding” and had fewer proteins
enriched in “dendritic/neuron spine” as well as “negative
regulation of protein depolymerization”. In young adult rats,
additional significantly enriched pathways included KEGG “endocytosis”,
“glucagon signaling pathway”, and “tight junction”
and reactome “transmission across chemical synapse”,
“glutamate neurotransmitter release cycle”, and “MTOR
signaling” (
Figure
5
D and
Figure
5
F). In aged rats, other significantly enriched pathways included
KEGG “glutamatergic synapse”, “oxytocin signaling
pathway”, “insulin secretion”, and “endocrine
and other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption” and reactome
“dopamine neurotransmitter release”, “neurotransmitter
release cycle”, and “protein–protein interactions
at synapse” (
Figure
5
E and
Figure
5
G). Note that a few pathways were enriched in both age groups (KEGG
“synaptic vesicle cycle”, reactome “neuronal
system” and “transmission across chemical synapses”),
but many more proteins hit these pathways in the aged group than the
young adult group.
Table S7
and
Table S8
list the details of pathway analyses
for young adult and aged rats, respectively.
Figure 5
Pathway enrichment analysis
results of the proteins mapped to the
phosphosites that differed between ethanol (EtOH)-exposed rats and
water (H
2
O)-exposed controls. (A–C) Results of gene
ontology (GO) enrichment analysis. The
y
-axes list
the top enriched pathways in either age group, and columns represent
the enrichment results of the young adult and aged rat groups. (D,
E) Excerpt results of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway analyses and (F, G) reactome pathway analysis separated by
age groups. Each small node represents a protein; each large node
represents a pathway; and a path represents a protein that is mapped
to a pathway.
3.7
Notable Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Changes
Associated with CIEE in Aged Rats Only
Ethanol-treatment-associated
proteins that were unique in each age group might provide insights
into the molecular attributes of the differences in behavioral flexibility
after CIEE that were observed between age groups. One of such proteins
is Prkcd (protein kinase C delta) which was found to be upregulated
in ethanol-treated aged rats compared to their water-treated counterparts
but not in young adult rats. Previous reports showed that chronic
ethanol exposure increased the expression of protein kinase C isoforms,
including Prkcd, in PC-12 and NG108-15 cell lines.
55
,
56
Single acute ethanol exposure could also increase Prkcd expression
in cultured rat hippocampal neurons, in turn decreasing the surface
level of the GABA
A
receptor δ subunit and reducing
extrasynaptic GABA
A
receptor-mediated tonic inhibition.
57
Given that Prkcd is expressed in the hippocampus
and dentate gyrus
58
and can regulate ethanol’s
effect on extrasynaptic GABA
A
receptors, CIEE might have
upregulated Prkcd expression in the hippocampus of the aged rats,
thereby altering extrasynaptic tonic GABAergic currents and in turn
contributing to the impaired behavioral flexibility. Moreover, Prkcd
had been implicated in AD.
59
Increased
PRKCD levels were found in brain tissues of patients with AD compared
to those of individuals without the disease, and the inhibition of
PRKCD expression was shown to reduce BACE1 expression and amyloid-β
levels.
60
These reports support the hypothesis
that an increased Prkcd level may be a key step in the development
of AD and related cognitive impairments. A few Prkcd phosphosites
(S643, T505, and S662;
Table S4
) and the
kinase activity of Prkcd were also upregulated in the ethanol-treated
aged rats compared to their water-treated counterpart (
Figure
3
G), suggesting the pathways
that involve Prkcd might be affected by the change in its protein
levels, activation via phosphorylation, and kinase activity. Contrastingly
in the young adult group, Prkcd kinase activity was downregulated
without any Prkcd phosphosites showing significant differential regulation,
thus inferring that the changes in Prkcd associated with the ethanol
treatment were age dependent. Pathway analyses in aged rats revealed
pathways potentially affected by the alterations in Prkcd protein
level and phosphorylation, including pathways involved in insulin
signaling and response, negative regulation of phosphorylation, positive
regulation of dephosphorylation, molecular import into cells (e.g.,
glucose, lipid, protein, ion), protein import into the nucleus, and
actin filament organization, which were all predicted to be upregulated
(
Table S6
and
Table S8
).
Other top treatment-associated proteins that showed distinct
proteomic differences in the aged group are Heph and Slc17a6. Heph
(hephaestin) is a transmembrane copper-dependent ferroxidase expressed
mainly in the intestines but is also found in the brain, including
the hippocampus, and participates in iron transport and homeostasis.
Brain iron overload has been recently proposed to be a potential pathogenic
process associated with the accelerated cognitive decline in alcohol
use disorder (AUD), which is supported by increased iron absorption
in individuals with AUD as a result of alcohol-induced elevation in
intestinal permeability, iron accumulation in the brains of individuals
with AUD, increased iron levels found in the brain tissues of AD patients,
neuron metabolism, and amyloid-β plaque deposition caused by
iron dyshomeostasis.
61
Here we found upregulated
Heph levels in aged ethanol-treated rats compared to their water-treated
counterparts. Although brain and blood iron levels were not measured
in this study, it would be intriguing to investigate in the future
whether chronic excessive ethanol exposure or consumption elevates
intestinal iron absorption and iron influx into the brain in aged
animals and humans.
Slc17a6 (vesicular glutamate transporter
2) is a glutamate transporter
that loads glutamate into presynaptic vesicles and is expressed during
the early postnatal stage and mostly in the thalamus and brainstem
of mature rodents but is also found in the hippocampus, cortex, and
cerebellum.
62
Little is known about the
involvement of Slc17a6 in memory, cognition, and the effect of ethanol
exposure. Mice exposed to ethanol during gestation were found to have
increased
Slc7a6
gene expression but decreased protein
levels in the hippocampus via microRNA regulation.
63
In contrast to this report, we found upregulation of Slc17a6
in aged ethanol-treated rats compared to their water-treated counterparts,
which might be attributed to the differences in the ethanol-exposure
paradigm and the age of exposure. Slc17a6 changes in the brain across
age, particularly toward more advanced years, need to be explored.
Camk2a (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha) is
a key player in calcium signaling and is required for hippocampal
long-term potentiation (LTP) and hippocampus-dependent cognitive tasks
such as spatial learning. It is found in several regions of the hippocampus,
primarily localized in pyramidal neuron dendrites and glutamate synapses,
64
,
65
but is also found in pyramidal neuron cell bodies (reviewed by Ghosh
and Anshua
66
).
Camk2a
knockout
mice showed decreased LTP in the CA1 region of the hippocampus
67
and exhibited selective impairments in hippocampus-dependent
spatial tasks.
68
,
69
Reduced Camk2a in the hippocampus,
in particular the CA3 region, had been associated with normal aging,
70
and age-related alteration in Camk2a activity
resulted in impaired cognition later in life.
71
Phosphorylated CAMK2A was found to be reduced, and autophosphorylated
CAMK2A at T286 was found to be redistributed in the hippocampus tissues
of patients with AD.
66
,
72
,
73
Here, we found that Camk2a protein levels, three Camk2a phosphosites
(S257, S333, and T334;
Table S4
), and Camk2a
kinase activity were downregulated in ethanol-treated aged rats compared
to their water-treated counterparts, which were consistent with the
behavioral flexibility observed in the aged rats. The reduction of
Camk2a kinase activity in turn differentially regulated phosphorylation
in proteins associated with cognitive functions such as Shank3 (SH3
and multiple ankyrin repeat domains 3; at S694 and S1511), Syngap1
(synaptic Ras GTPase activating protein 1; at S1118 and S1121), and
Th (tyrosine hydroxylase; at S19 and S40;
Figure
3
H). Interestingly, Camk2a kinase activity
was upregulated in ethanol-treated young adult rats, suggesting that
Camk2a was differentially regulated after CIEE and/or in the subsequent
withdrawal in the two age groups.
Proteomic pathway analysis
identified pathways potentially affected
by CIEE in aged rats, including those involved in (synaptic) the vesicle
membrane, and exocytosis, the synaptic vesicle cycle, sodium transporter
activities, and neurotransmitter release cycle indicated a dysregulation
of neurotransmission. Similar pathways were found in the phosphoproteomic
pathway analysis with additional emphasis on glutamatergic and dopaminergic
neurotransmissions which were both important in hippocampus-dependent
cognitive functions. Pathways related to synaptic structure, dendrite
development, synaptic plasticity, and neuronal apoptosis were also
found to be enriched by between-treatment proteomic and phosphoproteomic
differences. Interestingly, the insulin receptor signaling pathway
and insulin resistance were revealed to be altered in the phosphoproteomic
analysis. Insulin and its receptor function are critical for hippocampal-dependent
cognitive tasks,
74
and insulin resistance
also impaired performance in the Morris water maze.
75
,
76
Insulin function had also been implicated in AD.
77
−
79
3.8
Notable Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Changes
Associated with CIEE in Young Adult Rats Only
Proteomic and
phosphoproteomic changes distinct in the young adult rats may reflect
protective mechanisms against the effects of ethanol on memory and
cognition. Kcnj13 (potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily
J member 13) was the most upregulated protein in young adult ethanol-treated
rats compared to the water-treated counterparts. It is a member of
the inwardly rectifying potassium channel family and was found to
be widely expressed in neurons and glial cells of the adult mouse
brain, including the hippocampus.
80
While
no direct research has investigated Kcnj13 in terms of hippocampal
function and interaction with ethanol, inwardly rectifying potassium
channels are known to be sites of action for ethanol.
81
It is important to investigate in the future the role of
Kcnj13 in hippocampal function, interaction with ethanol, and cognitive
functions.
Another top treatment-associated protein in young
adult rats was Slc20a2 (solute carrier family 20 member 2), a type
III sodium-dependent phosphate transporter that plays a key role in
phosphate homeostasis in the brain by importing phosphate into cells.
82
Mutations in
SLC20A2
are associated
with idiopathic basal ganglia calcification which can lead to various
neuropsychiatric, cognitive, and motor symptoms.
83
Parallel with the symptoms in humans,
Slc20a2
homozygous knockout mice exhibited spatial learning memory impairments
and sensorimotor gating deficits which might be independent of the
hippocampus and dorsal striatum since calcification seldom occurred
in these regions at day 80.
84
Slc20a2
was among the list of genes with gene expression levels altered
in astrocytes isolated from the mouse medial prefrontal cortex at
peak withdrawal after chronic ethanol intoxication.
85
Although the roles of hippocampal Slc20a2 in response to
ethanol and behavioral flexibility are yet to be uncovered, here we
demonstrated that an upregulation of its protein level might confer
a protective effect on behavioral flexibility against CIEE.
Among the pathways that were dysregulated only in young adult rats
based on between-treatment-group proteomics differences (
Table S5
) were those related to mitochondrial
respiratory function, which concurred with previous reports that involved
chronic ethanol exposure.
86
,
87
Ethanol was found to
induce mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production,
88
and we found pathways related to the cellular
response to reactive oxygen species (hydrogen peroxide in particular)
were downregulated. Pathways related to phosphatidylinositol phosphate
(in particular phosphatidylinositol-4,5 biphosphate; PIP
2
), GDP, and GTP binding as well as GTPase activity were estimated
to be downregulated, suggesting the signaling transduction pathways
and other regulatory pathways—such as ion channel regulation
and exocytosis
89
,
90
—using these major signaling
molecules might also be downregulated. Pathways related to mRNA splicing
and processing were upregulated, but those related to translation
regulation (particularly in translation initiation and RNA binding)
were downregulated, which agreed with the reported effects of chronic
ethanol exposure on genome-wide splicing changes
91
and synaptosome transcriptomic changes
92
and on protein synthesis impairment and translation initiation.
93
,
94
3.9
Limitations
This study is limited
by the lack of female rats and further functional studies of candidate
proteins. Furthermore, we utilized retired male breeders which may
impact our results. Future research with female rodents is required
to explore sex-specific ethanol-induced hippocampal proteomic and
phosphoproteomic changes as well as to elucidate the functions of
candidate proteins and related pathways in ethanol-induced behavioral
inflexibility. In addition, an unexpected difference in the first
two trials of the behavioral flexibility test highlights the need
to use additional procedures to further investigate this finding.
Moreover, rats were sacrificed 4 days after the last gavage, and the
molecular changes reported might not reflect the effects immediately
upon the end of the ethanol exposure paradigm or earlier withdrawal.
Lastly, our findings in the proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses
need to be interpreted cautiously, and empirical validations are needed
to ascertain whether these differences and the proposed mechanisms
are true.
4
Conclusions
This study demonstrated
that CIEE led to selective behavioral flexibility
impairments in aged male Sprague–Dawley rats but not in young
adult rats, suggesting that late-in-life AUD may confer an increased
risk of cognitive impairments and/or a faster cognitive decline. Potential
age-group-dependent differences in hippocampal proteins, phosphosites,
and functional pathways associated with CIEE were identified, and
some have been implicated in cognitive deficits and AD. Future research
needs to validate these candidate proteins and pathways and further
explore the molecular impact of CIEE in aged animals.