Extracellular vesicles (EVs)
are bound by a lipid bilayer, ranging from ∼50 nm to a few
micrometers in size, and are released by cells in their environment.
They include microvesicles, resulting from the budding of the cell
plasma membrane; exosomes, small vesicles formed through the inner
budding of endosomes which then fuse with the cell membrane; and apoptotic
vesicles, shed during a programed cell death.
1
,
2
They
carry a complex biomolecular cargo of lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins,
and have become recognized for their major role in cell-to-cell communication
3
−
7
and as cellular messengers transferring material and molecular information
from cell to cell. EVs are critical to many physiological processes
and diseases, such as cancer,
8
−
11
and have further been recognized for their role as
biomarkers, notably based on the variations of their protein content.
12
−
14
There has been a growing interest in understanding which proteins
are expressed and enriched in EVs, and which ones are co-enriched.
Various EV protein analysis technologies have been developed or
optimized in recent years, notably mass spectrometry,
15
,
16
flow cytometry,
17
,
18
microfluidics,
19
,
20
plasmonics,
21
,
22
and antibody microarrays (as
well as affinity binder arrays).
23
,
24
Many analyses
rely on the bulk lysis of the EVs and detect both intravesicular proteins
in the lumen of the vesicle (inner)
16
,
25
and membrane
proteins that are accessible from the outside (outer). However, co-expression
information is lost as part of the lysis and only ensemble averages
are available. Enrichment by affinity capture of an outer protein
followed by elution and/or lysis reveals the co-expression and enrichment
for one outer protein at a time.
23
,
26
,
27
A variety of proteins from multiple families
have been probed in
EVs. Tetraspanins and integrins (ITGs) are among the most commonly
detected outer targets,
28
while inner proteins
such as cytokines,
29
pathway effectors,
and cell machinery components were analyzed. Heat shock proteins,
such as HSP90 and HSP70, and Alix, the protein involved in the syndecan-syntenin-Alix
pathway for exosome biogenesis and cargo-sorting, are commonly found
in EVs.
30
,
31
Antibody microarrays can be used for
the pairwise combinatorial
analysis of protein co-expression in EVs. Arrays of antibody microspots
targeting outer EV proteins (
capture antibodies
)
are used to enrich EVs, forming spatially resolvable subpopulations
based on outer protein expression. Immobilized EVs can then be probed
with additional, labeled
detection antibodies
against
other transmembrane and surface proteins. We can be confident that
the protein pairs between capture and detection antibody are expressed
on the same EV, but because we lack single EV resolution, we only
obtain expression information averaged over the subpopulation defined
by the capture antibody. Further co-expression information can be
obtained at the population level by co-incubation with multiple detection
antibodies simultaneously. However, the co-expression of outer-inner
proteins has remained challenging because the bilayer shields the
inner proteins that are not accessible for antibody binding.
By contrast, in tissues and cells, extracellular and cytosolic
proteins are readily mapped using immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry,
respectively. To stain cytosolic proteins, including the cytosolic
epitopes of transmembrane proteins, cells are chemically fixed (cross-linked)
and permeabilized using surfactants, followed by a so-called antigen
retrieval (AR) step that breaks cross-links and exposes protein epitopes
for binding, using enzymes, chemicals such as urea, heat treatments,
or a combination thereof.
32
−
34
Conceptually, it may be possible
to apply similar protocols to EVs. To the best of our knowledge, this
had not yet been reported, possibly because EVs are much smaller,
more susceptible to disruption, and contain comparatively little protein.
Therefore, a distinct protocol specific to EVs is needed.
Here,
we introduce the high-throughput, multiplexed analysis of
EV inner and outer proteins (EVPio). Using antibody microarrays, EV
subpopulations are (i) captured and immobilized based on the expression
of an outer target protein, (ii) fixed and subjected to AR using protocols
developed and optimized here, followed by (iii) the multiplexed detection
of up to three inner and outer proteins per spot, measured simultaneously
using different fluorophores. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was
derived by dividing the assay signal by the background noise (embodied
by the standard deviation, SD, of replicate measurements) and used
to benchmark and optimize most assay steps by maximizing the SNR.
To address the low concentration and weak signal of inner proteins,
we introduce DNA barcoding of the detection antibodies and complementary,
fluorescent, branched DNA structures for the signal amplification.
To illustrate the phenotyping potential of EVPio, EVs from two colorectal
cancer (CRC) epithelial adenocarcinoma cell lines with distinct mutation
profiles, HT29 and SW403,
35
were captured
using four outer proteins, and the pairwise co-expression of eight
outer and four inner proteins quantified in each of the four subpopulations.
Results
EVPio Analysis: Overview and Operation Workflow
We
introduce the combinatorial EVPio analysis as a method to study the
inner and outer protein contents of EVs. EV subpopulations are enriched
based on their surface protein content using antibody microarrays
with multiple different capture antibodies (
Figure
1
). Briefly, using an inkjet spotter, each
slide is patterned with 16 identical microarrays with each 100 spots
of up to 10 different antibodies targeting surface protein markers,
laid out as rows of 10 replicate spots. The microarrays were delimited
by gaskets to form wells, and each well was incubated overnight with
50 μL of sample containing ∼1 × 10
10
EVs/mL
(obtained by size exclusion chromatography of cell supernatant and
used with minimal dilution to maximize binding across the capture
spots). The EVs were fixed, then subjected to an AR step optimized
to allow the simultaneous detection of multiple inner and outer proteins,
as described in detail below. Processed EVs were incubated with a
mixture of up to three different detection antibodies per well, and
upon rinsing and drying, binding of the detection antibodies was detected
using a microarray scanner used to analyze the different fluorescence
wavelengths. The overall protocol, from array fabrication to imaging,
could be completed in three days. Many inner proteins are challenging
to detect due to low concentrations and resulting weak signals. The
detection antibodies were conjugated with an oligonucleotide barcode
for hybridizing the complementary fluorescent detection oligos, including
linear and multibranched oligos for further increasing the SNR,
36
−
38
as detailed below.
Figure 1
EVPio: combinatorial profiling of extracellular vesicle
inner and
outer proteins. (A) The EVPio assay is performed on a well gasket-covered
glass slide that has been inkjet printed with 16 10 × 10 subarrays
of antibodies, where each row targets a different EV surface protein.
(B) EVPio workflow: (1) capture antibodies are inkjet printed on a
functionalized slide (PolyAn 2D-Aldehyde), (2) the slide is washed
and unoccupied sites are blocked, (3) the sample is incubated on the
antibody spots and the EVs are captured based on their surface protein
markers, (4) bound EVs are fixed on the slide, (5) the slide is AR
treated, (6) quenched to get rid of the remaining reactive groups,
(7) the slide is washed and incubated with up to three different oligo
barcode-conjugated primary detection antibodies, (8) the slide is
washed and incubated with complementary fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide
constructs (up to three colors), and (9) immobilized immunolabeled
EVs are detected using a confocal microarray scanner. Microspots,
antibodies, oligonucleotides, and EVs are not to scale.
Fixation, Permeabilization, and AR of EVs
The lipid
bilayer forms a barrier which must be breached to allow the detection
antibodies to diffuse inside of EVs and bind inner proteins, while
preventing those proteins from diffusing out. Hence, a series of treatments,
including fixation with formaldehyde to cross-link diffusible proteins
inside the EVs, permeabilization, and AR to make the cross-linked
proteins accessible to the detection antibodies, are necessary. Fixation
is commonly used for EVs
39
,
40
and can covalently
link EVs to the capture antibodies, preventing their detachment during
subsequent procedures and thus minimizing the signal loss. However,
the network of methylene bridges formed following fixation limits
the immunodetection within the EV lumen by masking binding epitopes
and via steric hindrance.
33
,
41
In cytochemistry, AR
is used to improve detection antibody binding through a mix of hydrolytic
breakage of intramolecular and intermolecular cross-links and other,
buffer-driven effects on protein entangling and renaturation
33
(
Figure
2
A). However, permeabilization and AR were found to also affect
the detection of outer proteins in EVs, which added a further constraint
when optimizing the assay conditions.
Figure 2
EVPio assay optimization for inner protein
detection. (A) Illustration
of the need for an AR step. (i) The inner proteins of captured EVs
are bound by the lipid bilayer membrane and inaccessible to antibodies.
(ii) Fixation cross-links inner proteins, while permeabilization allows
antibodies to diffuse into EVs, but methylene cross-linking limits
the accessibility to epitopes. Permeabilization can be used to allow
antibodies to breach the membrane while keeping cytosolic proteins
in place, but cross-links can limit the epitope accessibility. (iii)
Heat-based AR treatment of EVs induces partial hydrolytic breakage
of cross-links, allowing antibody binding of retained and immobilized
proteins. (B) AR optimization experiments with different buffers/additives,
temperatures and incubation times, and fluorescence detection signal
for inner protein HSP90 and outer protein EGFR, with superposed heatmap.
The red rectangle indicates the optimal condition that was chosen
based on high HSP90 and high EGFR signals. Signal values are above
the threshold of NC + 2SD unless grayed. A zero value indicates a
negative or zero difference between the signal and its associated
no EV control. (C) Fluorescence micrograph of the optimal AR condition:
1 min at 90 °C, in PBS. (D) Bar graph of HSP90 detection signal
on spots with CD63 capture antibody and negative control spots with
GAM antibody serving as NC. The threshold of NC + 2SD is illustrated
as a horizontal line.
AR is a customizable process with many adjustable
parameters including
buffer, additives, pH, incubation time, temperature, and heating method
(microwave, pressure cooker, water bath, etc.).
34
Common additives used in AR include denaturants and chaotropic
agents, such as urea.
33
To adapt AR to
EVs, we selected four parameters: buffer, temperature, incubation
time, and the presence of a dedicated permeabilization step; and optimized
them for simultaneous detection of both HSP90, an inner, cytosolic
target, and of EGFR, an outer, membrane receptor tyrosine kinase often
overexpressed in cancer.
42
We used fluorescent
signal strength (in RFU) to monitor the target protein presence and
detectability following the treatment, and to guide the optimization
in order to maximize the inner protein detection signal. Array images
were manually assessed for overall cleanliness. CD63-GFP-expressing
EVs from A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells (A431-GFP,
Figure S1
),
43
of well-known proteomic
composition,
44
were used as a model and
immobilized on the microarray spots using an anti-CD63 capture antibody.
A water bath was used for heating, and phosphate buffer saline (PBS,
pH 7.0), trisbuffered saline (TBS, pH 9.0), and urea 6 M in PBS (pH
9.5) were used as buffers based on the historical conditions used
for AR in cell immunohistochemistry.
33
,
34
The
fluorescent signal for HSP90 and EGFR for 18 different AR conditions
and a control without AR are shown in
Figure
2
B. Incubation in PBS at 90 °C for 1
min (
Figure
2
C,D) was
observed to give the highest signal for HSP90 and a strong signal
for EGFR. The elongated spot shape in
Figure
2
C is due to comet tails, a phenomenon where
minor, directional spreading of the antibody microspots happens upon
washing. Fixation followed by permeabilization with various concentrations
of Triton X-100,
45
without AR, allowed
us to detect the inner membrane epitopes of transmembrane proteins,
but not free, cytosolic proteins (data not shown). When a separate
permeabilization step (10 min 0.05% Triton X-100) and AR were used,
the fluorescence signals were lower than when only AR was used, especially
in the case of HSP90. With separate permeabilization, the optimal
temperature and time shifted to a cooler, longer incubation (70 °C,
2 min in PBS), but only yielded a detection signal of 11,300 relative
fluorescence units (RFU) for HSP90, compared to 51,000 RFU for the
optimal condition without separate permeabilization (
Table S1
). These results led us to conclude that AR also permeabilized
the EVs and might eliminate the need of a separate permeabilization
step. Interestingly, in the absence of dedicated permeabilization
with Triton-X, AR with PBS (pH = 7.0) led to more than five times
higher HSP90 signals than with TBS (pH = 9.0) or 6 M urea in PBS (pH
= 6.0). In tissues, AR is commonly performed in non-neutral pH buffers
to generate the electrostatic charges that help prevent aggregation
upon sample cooling, ensuring that the epitopes remain exposed.
33
However, the effectiveness of this approach
is known to be dependent on sample composition and the epitopes probed,
33
,
34
which could account for the differences in the optimal protocols.
Of note, while the optimal AR and heating time is 1 min for HSP90
and EGFR detection in EVs (
Figure
2
), classic immunohistochemistry protocols typically
recommend 10–20 min.
33
Preliminary
testing indeed showed that times over 5 min resulted in almost complete
loss of signal (data not shown). The significant differences in optimal
parameters underscore the differences between EVs and immunohistochemistry
imaging of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues for which classic
AR protocols are optimized. In summary, antibody microarray-bound
EVs are more fragile and more easily permeabilized by AR and require
much less hydrolytic breakage than tissues, which can be accounted
for by the absence of extracellular matrix, cell junctions, and a
cytoskeleton, and a different process that omits paraffin embedding
and removal.
Barcoding and Signal Amplification Improve EVPio Assay Performance
and Versatility
Multiplexed EV analysis can be accomplished
by using multiple detection antibodies with each having a different
fluorescence spectrum to detect different inner and outer proteins
simultaneously. Several options exist to introduce the spectral multiplexing.
Unlabeled detection antibodies from different species can be recognized
by fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies, or by using biotinylated
detection antibodies and fluorescent streptavidin together with species-specific
secondary antibodies (
Figure S2
). Whereas
for duplex detection these strategies work well, for higher plex,
species cross-reactivity becomes a challenge,
46
as do the constraints and availability of detection antibodies from
specific species beyond the most commonly used ones.
47
Mixing biotin-streptavidin and species-based detection
introduces variation through the differences in the way the targets
are detected, requiring additional adjustments to the data before
it can be interpreted. The use of oligonucleotide barcodes to label
antibodies in multiplexed settings is often used to address the aforementioned
issues
48
,
49
and was adopted to introduce 3-Plex detection
on the EVPio microarrays.
To achieve the signal amplification
needed to detect the inner proteins, we introduced branched DNA signal
amplification and evaluated oligonucleotides with linear (
Figure
3
A), two-branch (
Figure
3
B) and four-branch
(
Figure
3
C) tree designs
with increasing numbers of fluorophores. Linear oligo detection involves
antibodies each labeled with a linear, 15-mer barcode, an imager strand
containing a barcode-complementary section and an additional barcode
for fluorescent probe hybridization, and a complementary probe strand
conjugated to a fluorophore (
Figure S13
). Fluorophores were added at the end of the fluorophore strands
to avoid interfering with barcode hybridization. Barcodes were designed
to be orthogonal to avoid cross-talk. The two-branch and four-branch
trees contain additional, intermediate strands that form branches,
which are pre-assembled using unique intermediate barcodes that were
also designed to minimize the cross-reactivity between strands. The
length of the end branches was limited to two fluorophore barcodes
to minimize the tree size. The two-branch and four-branch trees have
the capacity to hybridize 4× and 8× more fluorescent probe
strands and have the potential to improve the assay signals by those
factors. However, the accessibility of inner proteins to larger trees,
different binding dynamics, and steric hindrance may constitute trade-offs
of larger trees, and result in a smaller number of binding events
and thus lower signal. The optimal design was thus evaluated experimentally.
Figure 3
Branched
DNA amplification improves EVPio assay performance. Schematics
of oligonucleotide constructs tested for signal amplification: (A)
linear strand with one fluorophore; (B) two-branch tree with four
fluorophores; (C) and four-branch tree with eight fluorophores. Length
ratios of oligos are not to scale. (D) SNR of biotin-streptavidin,
linear, two-branch, and four-branch detection schemes for the CD9
detection of SW403 EVs at 9.1 × 10
10
particles/mL.
Barcoded antibodies were first incubated and bound to the proteins
expressed in immobilized SW403 EVs, followed by incubation and hybridization
of pre-assembled oligo trees bearing Alexa Fluor 647 fluorophores.
The two-branch amplification design gave signals closest to the benchmark
biotin–streptavidin detection. Signal thresholds for each detection
scheme, calculated as the NC (GAR) signal + 2 SD, are indicated by
horizontal lines color-matched to the corresponding bars. Error bars
are SE.
We used SNRs to guide the optimization of the EVPio
assay protocol
for oligonucleotide-based labeling and signal amplification, including
washing protocol, quenching solutions, incubation, and hybridization
buffers, and combinations of specific additives such as sheared salmon
sperm DNA (SSS DNA) and dextran sulfate (DS) for linear, two-branch
and four-branch amplification (
Figures S3 and S4
). Following optimization, again using CD9 detection, this
time following capture with antibodies against EV-associated tetraspanins
CD9, CD63, and CD81, and adhesion molecule EpCAM, we benchmarked linear,
two-branch, and four-branch amplification (without AR) against biotin–streptavidin
detection in EVs from SW403 cells (
Figure
3
D). The SNRs obtained with biotin–streptavidin
detection and the two-branch construct were statistically comparable
for all EV subpopulations (
p
> 0.05), while linear
detection and four-branch amplification led to significantly different
SNRs (
p
< 0.05), except in the case of the CD81
+
subpopulation detected with the four-branch tree (
p
= 0.29) (
Figure
3
D). These results, which echo those obtained in the aforementioned
assay optimization experiments, may reflect the increased steric hindrance
between two-branch and four-branch trees. We adopted the two-branch
design for subsequent experiments as a trade-off between having the
maximal signal and minimizing possible interference due to steric
hindrance, a factor that becomes even more important with the introduction
of multiplexing.
Multiplexed Analysis of Inner and Outer EV Proteins
The adoption of branched oligo trees for multiplexed EVPio analysis
was first explored and optimized with duplex two-color (Alexa Fluor
488 and Cy5) detection of HSP70 as the inner protein and CD9 as the
outer protein, using four different capture antibodies (
Figure S5
). In the CD63
+
, CD9
+
, EpCAM
+
, and CD81
+
subpopulations tested
(immobilized using the corresponding capture antibodies), we found
that the two-branch trees were optimal for duplex HSP70 and CD9 detection
(
Figure S5A–D
). We further verified
whether multiplexing might skew the signals by comparing them to those
obtained through a singleplexed analysis carried out in parallel,
and found them to be concordant for EVs from SW403 cells (
Figure S5F
), while for HT29 EVs, multiplexing
resulted in signal loss for CD63 detection, regardless of amplification,
and gain for CD9 and HSP70 detection (
Figure S5E
). The same analysis was conducted for triplex detection with the
simultaneous detection of HSP70, CD9, and CD63 with Alexa Fluor 647,
Cy3, and Alexa Fluor 488, respectively, both for HT29 (
Figure
4
), and SW403 (
Figure S6
). In this series of experiments, triplexing (compared
to singleplex) of protein detection led to signal increases of 2.9
on average (median of 1.4) for EVs from HT29 (
Figure
4
B), and 3.9 (median 2.9) for EVs from SW403
cells (
Figure S6B
).
Figure 4
Combinatorial EVPio analysis
of inner, cytosolic proteins and outer,
membrane proteins and validation of multiplexing through multiplexed
vs singleplexed analysis. (A) Fluorescence micrographs of inner protein
HSP70 and outer proteins CD9 and CD63 detected on EVPio microarrays
with CD63, CD9, CD81, and EpCAM capture spots, and negative controls
(GFP) in HT29 EVs at 3.8 × 10
10
particles/mL. Complete
array images can be found in
Figure S7
.
(B) Violin log plots of the averaged ratios for all four capture antibodies
(CD63, CD9, EpCAM, and CD81) as well as a nonspecific control (GFP)
of multiplexed over singleplexed signals for inner (HSP70) and outer
(CD9 and CD63) detection antibodies and different amplification trees
for HT29 EVs. Averaged multiplexed signals are comparable, and up
to ∼2.5× higher than the singleplexed signals. Violin
plots are used to show the distribution of the data, and overlay a
boxplot (median, interquartile range) with a kernel density plot (probabilities).
50
(C) Bar graphs of linear, two-branch, and four-branch
trees for the signal amplification. Two-branch amplification gave
the highest signals. Errors bars are SE.
In HT29 and SW403 EVs, inner and outer proteins
were simultaneously
detected in all four subpopulations with signal amplification (
Figures
4
A,C and
S6A,C
). HSP70 could be detected consistently
above threshold with two- and four-branch amplification constructs,
with 3.5–13× higher signals for two-branch amplification,
reaching 10,200 RFU in the SW403 CD9
+
EV subpopulation.
Inner targets, which are cross-linked to surrounding proteins within
fixed and AR-treated EVs, may be more accessible to two-branch constructs.
These results show that it is possible to simultaneously detect outer
and inner proteins such as HSP70 with EVPio analysis and two-branch
amplification.
In summary, singleplexed and multiplexed values
are broadly in
agreement, with multiplexing occasionally producing higher signal
and only very rarely signal loss (
Figures
4
B and
S6B
). In
particular, two-branch-based signal amplification gave signals that
agree and even improve upon singleplexed values, especially for the
HSP70 detection. These findings strengthened our decision to use the
two-branch design for further EVPio assays.
EVPio Analysis Recapitulates Key Proteomic Characteristics of
EVs from CRC Cell Lines
To showcase the potential of EVPio
analysis, we phenotyped the inner and outer proteins in EVs from CRC
cell lines HT29 and SW403 (
Figure S8
).
EVs were captured on the array by targeting the three “canonical”
EV-associated tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, and CD81)
51
or EpCAM, an adhesion molecule overexpressed in epithelial
cancers.
52
A panel of 12 protein detection
targets were selected for their expression in EVs and their biological
function. The outer proteins were all membrane proteins, and include
the three tetraspanins used for capture (CD9, CD63, and CD81) as well
as CD82, another tetraspanin and known tumor metastasis suppressor;
53
and the ITG subunits (α2, α6, β1,
and β4)
8
that have been associated
with EV-mediated metastatic organotropism.
8
Among the inner proteins was the tight junction protein claudin-2,
54
a prognosis biomarker of replacement-type liver
metastasis in EVs from CRC patients,
55
detected
through its cytoplasmic domain, and cytosolic proteins, which were
selected based on their known and widespread association with EVs.
56
They included the heat shock proteins HSP90
and HSP70,
57
and ESCRT-associated protein
Alix, which is involved in EV biogenesis and cargo sorting.
2
,
58
Targets were divided in four sets and used for triplexed detection
(
Figures S9 and S10
). The inner and outer
protein profiles are shown in
Figure
5
.
Figure
5
A shows the absolute RFU values of fluorescence expression for HT29
EVs, while
Figure
5
B shows the SW403/HT29 signal ratio for comparison. The use of RFU
signal ratios allows us to highlight the differences, avoids the need
for a binding curve or calibration (which unlike for enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are not used in EV analysis to date),
and could help distinguish between the healthy and diseased samples,
for example. The condition, however, is that all samples be run as
one experiment under the same conditions to avoid introducing experimental
errors. To evaluate the reproducibility of our approach, a replicate
experiment was performed, and the two measurements compared (
Figure S11
). The results from the two repeat
experiments were highly correlated (
R
= 0.96–0.97).
Figure 5
Multiplexed
EVPio analysis of HT29 and SW403 EVs at 1.8 ×
10
10
particles/mL immobilized with four capture antibodies
and a NC (GFP), with four separate 3-plex assays to detect 12 inner
and outer proteins. Phenotyping results for (A) HT29 and (B) SW403
EVs. The values for SW403 EVs are expressed as the ratio of the SW403
to the HT29 signal, highlighting the differences between EVs from
the two cell lines. Inner proteins are colored in red for emphasis.
In HT29 EVs, the CD9
+
EV subpopulations presented the highest
overall signals, with ITG α6, CD63, ITG β1, and ITG β4
as notable detected markers. HSP70 and Alix were the strongest inner
targets. SW403 EVs presented notably higher ITG α6, CD9, and
CD81 signals in the EpCAM
+
EV subpopulation. Grayed values
represent the absence of signal.
Among the four capture antibodies, the CD9
+
subpopulation
led to overall strong detection signals, consistent with a high number
of vesicles captured. CD9 detection signals were strong as well and
exceeded the threshold of the detection signal for the negative capture
control (NC) (anti-GFP) plus 2 SDs in all cases, with the highest
signal found in the CD9
+
subpopulation of SW403 EVs (
Figure S10
). The fluorescence for other tetraspanins
was lower, and in some cases did not exceed the threshold. As can
be seen in several panels, the background noise measured on the anti-GFP
antibody spots is significant and explains why signals that are clearly
visible are below the threshold (also see
Discussion
below). ITG subunit α6 was the protein marker with the highest
detection signal across all captured EVs, reaching 20,000 RFU and
9000 RFU in CD9
+
and EpCAM
+
SW403 EVs, consistent
with the overexpression of ITG α6β4 in CRC.
59
ITG β1, whose high expression in CRC is
associated with poor prognosis,
60
was notably
detected in CD9
+
SW403 EVs, but was also found at values
close to threshold in EpCAM
+
SW403 EV as well as CD63
+
and CD9
+
HT29 EVs. Inner proteins, including both
untethered cytosolic proteins as well as the inner leaflet domain
of transmembrane proteins, could also be detected. Alix gave consistently
above threshold signals in all EV subpopulations under study, reaching
a maximum of 1100 and 3000 RFU in HT29 and SW403 EVs, respectively,
in accordance with its involvement in the ESCRT pathway and EV biogenesis.
2
,
58
While HSP90 was not detected above the threshold, a notable signal
was obtained for the CD9
+
SW403 EV subpopulation. Claudin-2
was primarily detected in CD9
+
EV subpopulations of both
cell types, with an additional notable expression in CD63
+
and EpCAM
+
HT29 EVs, while HSP70 gave signal in all subpopulations,
with CD9
+
EVs of both types and CD63
+
HT29 EVs
yielding above threshold values.
Our data shows that despite
the genetic differences of their originating
cells, HT29 and SW403 EVs present similar overall profiles regarding
the protein combinations included in our proof-of-concept panel, albeit
with some key differences (
Figure
5
B). In SW403 EVs, the EpCAM
+
subpopulation
presented approximately 10× higher signals for CD81, CD9, and
ITG α6, while inner proteins HSP90 and Alix had ∼6×
stronger signals compared to HT29 EVs. The CD9
+
and CD81
+
subpopulations also had higher signals (∼3–5×)
for several detection targets, including CD81, CD9, ITG α6,
and claudin-2. Notable targets with lower signals included CD82 in
the EpCAM
+
subpopulation and ITG β1 in the CD63
+
subpopulation. The CD63
+
subpopulation had the
largest number of lower signal targets, with nearly half presenting
lower signals than in HT29 EVs.
A caveat of assessing the inner
and outer targets simultaneously
post-AR is loss of signal for outer targets, which can be expressed
as the ratio between the signals obtained with and without an AR step
(
Figure S12
). While AR usually enhance
inner protein signals (when inner protein detection can be achieved
pre-AR), with an average AR/no AR ratio of 4.1, outer proteins signals
are usually reduced, with an average ratio of 0.25. This signal loss
can potentially be avoided for smaller target subsets through optimization
of the process to the specific antibodies used.
34
Alternatively, inner and outer proteins can be assessed
in separate high-throughput assays, retaining the ability to perform
triplexed detection in up to 10 spatially segregated subpopulations
at the marginal cost of using an additional slide.
In summary,
the EVPio platform can be used to profile the protein
content of EVs originating from different cell types in a multiplexed
and high-throughput manner.
Discussion
Here, we introduce the EVPio analysis platform
that includes an
antibody microarray, EV-specific AR treatment, antibody barcoding,
and branched DNA signal amplification at the labeling step for the
multiplexed analysis of inner and outer protein co-expression patterns
in EVs in situ. On a single slide of 16 arrays incubated each with
50 μL of sample, we quantified 12 proteins in EVs from two cell
lines captured using four different capture antibodies, along with
the controls. Following extensive optimization of fixation and AR
using HSP90 and EGFR as inner and outer model proteins, respectively,
a simple protocol was obtained which only adds 1 min incubation in
PBS at 90 °C after fixation and simultaneously permeabilizes
EVs and restores antigens, thus enabling a simultaneous probing of
inner and outer proteins in a proof-of-concept panel. Of note, the
signal intensity for the outer proteins was lower after AR. Hence,
depending on the application, and notably if there is a desire to
compare the results to samples that did not undergo AR (nor permeabilization),
it may be advantageous to incubate the sample on two replicate sets
of microarrays, and use one set for multiplexed outer protein detection,
and the other, with AR, for multiplexed inner protein detection. The
use of oligo-conjugated antibodies and two-branch DNA trees (see also
further below) eliminates many constraints on the detection antibody
usage while fluorophores can be varied from experiment to experiment
by changing the fluorescent probe oligo.
The steps of the EVPio
assay were optimized sequentially as the
workflow was constructed, using parameters and ranges narrowed down
based on the literature and preliminary experiments. The initial optimization
of the AR process was performed using fluorescently labeled secondary
antibodies and primary antibodies against model proteins HSP90 and
EGFR, and only a subset of possible incubation times and temperatures
were tested to limit the number of experiments (
Figure
2
B and
Table S1
). The resulting optimal parameters were retained after branched
DNA amplification was added to address low inner protein signals and
enable multiplexing without species constraints using the combinations
of oligo-labeled detection antibodies. It is thus possible that the
assay conditions could be further optimized, for example, through
testing using the proteins to be analyzed and branched DNA amplification.
Design of experiments (e.g., Taguchi method) can help explore a large
range of factors including buffer compositions, surfactants, temperatures,
incubations times, and signal amplification, and both identify the
optimal factor values and quantify their respective contribution to
the chosen optimization parameter, for example, assay SNR.
61
,
62
Here, optimization was conducted based on the expression of one
inner and one outer protein as a starting point to look for a balance
between increased inner protein accessibility and the unfolding and
detachment of more accessible outer proteins. The inclusion of multiple
inner and outer proteins during the optimization of the AR protocol
could help identify more broadly applicable, optimal trade-offs between
inner and outer protein detection, or generate several AR conditions
adapted to specific sets of proteins.
Reproducibility and quality
control are central to reproducible
experiments and science, and both reagent-driven cross-reactivity
and spatial bias will need to be considered. Reagent-driven cross-reactivity
can arise when mixing multiple detection antibodies
47
and lead to false positive signals, such as the ones observed
here with our negative anti-GFP control in some experiments. We previously
identified spatial bias as a likely underestimated source of variability
in antibody microarrays,
63
and it is of
particular concern when multiple samples are measured at different
locations on a slide. We performed a visual, qualitative check of
each functionalized slide prior to the assay by scanning pristine
slides with strong signal gain in the 532 nm channel. The slight autofluorescence
of the aldehyde coating produced a visible signal, and slides with
immediately visible irregularities were discarded. The possible impact
of spatial bias on EV microarrays assay reproducibility and variability
was not studied in depth, however.
63
The addition of oligonucleotide barcoding circumvents common multiplexing
issues such as species cross-reactivity and limited availability of
species or directly labeled antibodies. The best suited primary antibody
can be used for every target, independently of its species, clonality,
or availability as a conjugate. Barcoding also offers flexibility
for future integration with higher-multiplexing schemes, such as next-generation
sequencing
64
,
65
or DNA exchange imaging,
48
and alternative signal amplification methods,
like polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or rolling circle amplification
(RCA).
Branched DNA signal amplification was explored to improve
the assay
performance while minimizing the assay time and cost. The oligo trees,
which can be assembled in parallel to the main assay, can directly
be incubated on the arrays, circumventing the need for enzymes, heating
and temperature control, and are easily customized with any fluorophore
label. Furthermore, the size of the trees can be selected prior to
the assay based on the expected abundance of the target protein and
the associated anticipated level of steric hindrance to improve the
signal strength (
Figure
3
). For low target concentrations, there would be enough space for
antibodies to bind with large trees, while at high concentrations,
the binding of one antibody and a large tree could limit binding to
adjacent sites by other antibodies conjugated to large trees, thus
leading to better signals for smaller trees. In addition, as up to
three proteins are detected simultaneously, steric hindrance effects
could become more acute with higher multiplexing, which solidified
our choice of the intermediate two -branch tree.
As a proof
of concept, we showed the potential of EVPio analysis
for phenotyping and comparing EV samples from two CRC cell lines.
Using a panel of four different EV capture antibodies combined with
12 different protein detection antibodies including tetraspanins,
ITGs, a disease-related claudin and EV-associated cytosolic targets,
we showed how EVPio can be used to characterize and compare EVs. The
protein co-expression patterns that were identified were consistent
with the CRC origin of the EVs, revealing both similarities and some
differences between the two originating CRC cell lines. While the
SW403/HT29 expression ratio of the majority of pairwise target combinations
assessed were within a factor 3×, some co-expression patterns
stood out as up to 10× higher (CD81, CD9, and ITG α6 in
EpCAM
+
EVs) or lower (CD82 in EpCAM
+
EVs, ITG
β1 in CD63
+
EVs) in SW403 EVs. Certain targets did
not meet the threshold of two SDs above NC (anti-GFP) spots background
(
Figure S10
). However, non-specific binding
between the capture and detection antibodies, and residual fixative-induced
autofluorescence (despite quenching) on that spot meant that cutoffthreshold
values increased. The 20 replicates used here helped map the variability,
and establish the high thresholds found in the Cy3 fluorescence channel,
which in our setup is the emission filter with the largest bandwidth,
rendering it particularly susceptible to the aforementioned sources
of background fluorescence. Strategies to improve the assay accuracy
and lower thresholds include replacing the Cy3 by another fluorophore
with emission that peaks further away from the autofluorescence peak
(such as near-infrared fluorophores) and/or switching to an emission
filter with a smaller bandwidth to minimize the contribution of autofluorescence,
at the possible cost of signal sensitivity.
A trade-off to using
different fluorophores are the different signal
intensities in each channel, which make quantitative analysis of protein
expression challenging. It might be possible to develop a normalization
protocol to account for the differences between the fluorophores (brightness)
and imaging setups (lasers, filters, etc.) used for each fluorescence
channel, but variable backgrounds and low signals may compromise the
quantitative analysis. Biased quantitative analysis will consequently
affect the comparison of protein combination signals within the same
EV sample. Note that the same co-expression item compared across different
types of EVs is not susceptible to those biases since key experimental
parameters (antibodies, fluorophores) are fixed. This type of comparison
also circumvents the limitations such as variability in performance
across antibodies.
Given the recent popularity of EVs and their
potential for contributing
to our understanding of health and disease, many existing technologies
have been harnessed and new platforms are created to study the EV
proteome, including ensemble average techniques such as mass spectrometry,
custom microfluidic devices, affinity binder arrays, and commercial
systems like ExoView. EVPio stands out with its blend of high customizability
(any antibody can be used, from any species), combination of inner
and outer protein detection with high antigen retention, effective
signal amplification, and compatibility with common lab equipment,
including either a microarray scanner or fluorescence microscope.
In summary, we described an antibody microarray-based workflow
for the simultaneous detection of transmembrane and cytosolic proteins
in EVs, which can be applied to phenotype EVs and derive co-expression
patterns in a multiplexed and high-throughput manner. We detailed
the optimization of critical aspects—inner protein detection,
multiplexing, and signal amplification—and showcased how the
EVPio analysis can be used to uncover disease-relevant protein co-expression
patterns in EVs from cancer cell lines. The loss of signal of outer
protein expression following AR should be considered when designing
an experiment. Depending on the application, inner and outer proteins
may be measured simultaneously on the same slide, or on separate slides
with only the ones for inner protein analysis subjected to AR. The
impact of the AR process on EV integrity at the nanoscale could also
be of interest and investigated through higher resolution methods
such as TEM to inform the detection of inner EV biomolecules in single
EV methods. EVPio analysis has the potential to yield extensive combinatorial
protein profiles, both from cell line-derived EVs as shown here but
also in EVs derived from other biological fluids. Inner and outer
protein profiles of EVs could help uncover complex proteomic signatures
relevant in many diseases and conditions, and thus contribute to develop
diagnostic and prognostic tools, as well as help advance EV characterization.
Materials and Methods
General EVPio Assay Workflow
Antibody microarrays were
patterned on PolyAn 2D-Aldehyde slides (PolyAn) using the sciFLEXARRAYER
SX inkjet bioprinter (Scienion). Slides were imaged in the 532 nm
channel at 100% gain prior to patterning to qualitatively assess the
uniformity of the aldehyde functionalization. Antibodies were diluted
at 100 μg/mL
66
in a solution of 15%
2,3-butanediol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 M betaine (Sigma-Aldrich) in
PBS and spotted in 16 (2 × 8) subarrays of 100 (10 × 10)
100 μm spots with a 500 μM pitch. Patterned slides were
incubated overnight at 70% humidity, washed for 15 min in 0.1% Tween-20
(T20, Thermo Fisher) in PBS, blocked for 3 h in a solution of 3% BSA
(Jackson ImmunoResearch) and 0.1% T20 in PBS, dried, and inserted
into 16-well gaskets (Grace Bio-Labs).
A portion of each EV
sample was dyed for validation purposes through incubation with CFDA-SE
(V12883, Invitrogen) at 1/250 concentration for 2 h at 37 °C.
Dyed and undyed samples were then supplemented with 1% BSA and incubated
with mild agitation (450 rpm) over the arrays for 2 h at room temperature
followed by overnight at 4 °C. Samples were washed with washing
buffer (0.03% T20 in PBS) at 450 rpm, and then fixed in 4% formaldehyde
[diluted in PBS from 16% methanol-free formaldehyde (w/v) solution,
Thermo Fisher]. For the AR step, gaskets were removed and arrays were
incubated for 1 min in 90 °C PBS. Following a Milli-Q water wash,
gaskets were reapplied and the arrays were quenched for 2 h at room
temperature (450 rpm) in a solution of 3% BSA, 0.3 M glycine, and
0.03% T20 in PBS. Detection antibodies at a concentration of 1 μg/mL
(outer targets) to 2–5 μg/mL (inner targets) were incubated
for 2 h at room temperature (450 rpm) in incubation buffer (3% BSA,
0.03% T20 in PBS).
Gasket wells were washed 3 times in washing
buffer, and then labeling
was performed either with fluorescent streptavidin/fluorescent species-matched
secondary antibodies (both 1:1000 in incubation buffer) or fluorescent
oligonucleotide probes/constructs (10–50 nM in PBS with 0.025%
T20, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mg/mL SSS DNA [Thermo Fisher] and 0.5% DS [Sigma])
for 30 min at room temperature, 450 rpm. When using oligonucleotides
for detection and labeling, the strands composing each amplification
construct (see
Figure
3
A–C) were mixed and annealed using a Biometra T-Gradient thermocycler
prior to labeling, and blocking, quenching, and incubation buffers
were supplemented with 0.5 mg/mL SSS DNA. The slides were then washed
for 3 min in washing buffer, dried, and imaged using a confocal microarray
scanner (InnoScan 1100 AL, Innopsys). For antibody or streptavidin-based
labeling, slides were washed for 15 min and rinsed with Milli-Q water
prior to drying and imaging.
Optimization of Inner Protein Detection
A431-GFP EV
samples were captured on microarrays of anti-CD63 (353014, Biolegend)
and goat anti-mouse (A16080, Invitrogen) antibodies and fixed as described
in the previous section. At the AR step, 19 combinations of buffer
(6 M urea [Sigma] in TBS [Fisher], pH 9.5; TBS; and PBS) temperature
(50, 70, and 90 °C), incubation time (1 min, 2 min) and permeabilization
status (with or without incubation in 0.05% Triton-X [Sigma] in PBS
for 10 min) were tested (
Figure
2
B). Claudin-1 (5190000, Life Technologies), HSP90β
(PA3-012, Invitrogen), and biotinylated EGFR antibodies (BAF231, R&D
Systems) were used at the detection step at concentrations of 5, 5,
and 1 μg/mL, respectively, followed by labeling with Alexa Fluor
647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibodies (A-21245, Invitrogen) and
streptavidin (
S21374
, Invitrogen).
Barcoding and Amplification Tree Design
Figure
3
A–C lists the oligonucleotide
strands used for amplification as well as the names of their constituting
sequences. Sequences are detailed in
Figure S13
. All oligonucleotides were supplied from IDT.
For the linear
probe design, the unique 21-mer fluorescent barcode (FBC) and a unique
toehold linker were designed sequentially by using EGNAS
67
to generate libraries of sequences, with FBC
used as neighbor for the linker library. The resulting sequences were
checked for secondary structures with QuickFold.
68
Orthogonal 15-bp nucleotide barcode (BC) sequences were
obtained by using EGNAS and PrimerPooler
69
for sequential sequence generation and cross-reactivity verification,
respectively, using FBC and the linker as neighbors, barcodes from
previous runs as included sequences, and Δ
G
= −7 as a cross-reactivity threshold. NUPACK
70
was used to assess the barcode interaction and narrow down
the sequences to a smaller number of orthogonal barcode sequences.
For the intermediate barcode (IBC, two-branch tree), EGNAS
67
was used to generate a set of 21-mer sequences
with 40–60% GC content, low hairpin tolerance, the complements
of the orthogonal barcodes and the fluorophore barcode as neighbors,
and quadruple of any nucleic acid as forbidden sequences. The resulting
sequences were fed to PrimerPooler
69
to
screen for cross-reactivity (threshold of Δ
G
= −6) against the orthogonal barcodes, the fluorophore barcodes,
and their complements. The remaining sequences were checked for folding
patterns as part of the complete bridge and imager strands with QuickFold,
68
and a sequence with melting temperatures not
exceeding 50 °C was chosen. An analogous pipeline was used for
the design of the four-branch tree (IBC1 and IBC2). For IBC1, EGNAS
was used as previously but without neighbors, and Δ
G
was set to −5.35 in PrimerPooler. For IBC2, IBC1′
and FBC′ were set as neighbors, and cross-reactivity was checked
against all BCs and BCs′; IBC1 and IBC1′; and FBC and
FBC′. QuickFold was used to check for folding within the bridge
2 and imaging strands.
HT29 and SW403 EV Profiling
HT29 and SW403 EVs at a
concentration of ∼1.8 × 10
10
were captured
on microarrays of CD63, CD9, GFP (MA5-15256, Invitrogen), EpCAM, and
CD81 antibodies. The starting EV concentration corresponds to the
lowest concentration tested which achieves positive signals for the
majority of the panel targets. The following trios of barcoded antibodies
were used for triplexed detection: CD63-BC38, ITG α2 (MAB1233,
R&D Systems)-BC64, and HSP70-BC23; CD9-BC51, ITG α6 (MAB1350,
R&D Systems)-BC09, and Alix (MA1-83977, Invitrogen)-BC60; CD81-BC50,
ITG β1 (MAB17781, R&D Systems)-BC27, and HSP90-BC60; CD82
(342102, Biolegend)-BC43, ITG β4 (MAB4060, R&D Systems)-BC79,
and claudin-2 (32–5600, Thermo Fisher)-BC61. Barcode-matched
two-branch amplification trees conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488, 555,
and 647 were used for labeling.